 

On July  10,  2002 (Calendar No.13), the City Planning Commission scheduled July 24, 2002,  for 

a public hearing on this application  ( C 020629 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on July 24, 

2002 (Calendar No.  17).  There were two  speakers in  favor and none opposed to the application. 

Two representatives  from the Forest Hills Community and  Civic Association testified in  favor of 

the  application and reiterated the community board's request for zoning designations that  more 

closely reflect the variety of existing building types and development patterns in  the community. 

Additionally, they voiced concern about new developments that were out of scale and character 

with surrounding buildings and  that new zoning should guide new development  to be more 

compatible  to the form and  scale of existing development. 

There were  no other speakers and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this  amendment of the Zoning Map is  appropriate. 

The present zoning in the  study area does not reflect  the existing building types and development 

patterns of the area.  The Commission believes the proposed  zoning  map amendments  will 

reinforce  the existing  neighborhood character, and establish zoning designations consistent with 

existing built  forms.  The  Commission believes that the zoning changes will guide new 

developments and alterations to be  more harmonious with the  scale  and configuration of 

11 

C 020629 ZMQ 

buildings in these portions of the Forest Hills  and Rego Park neighborhoods. 

The Commission notes that Sub-Areas 1A,  1B  and 2  are  similarly developed with one- and two- 

family attached brick rowhouses, yet the sub-areas have zoning designations which do  not reflect 

the prevalent rowhouse character.  The Commission believes the rezoning of Sub-Areas  1 A and 

1B  from R7-1  to R4B and  Sub-Area 2 from R4 to R4B would prevent out of character 

development and alterations and  establish a floor area ratio consistent with the  existing 

development.  The Commission  is aware that the change in FAR for Sub-Area 1A and  1B is 

substantial, however the Commission  believes the rezoning of this area from  3.44 FAR to  0.9 

FAR will better reflect the rowhouse character  of these eight Rego Park blocks just south of 

Queens Boulevard. 

The Commission notes that within Sub-Area 2, commercial developments  on the west side of 

69th Avenue, between Groton and Harrow  Streets have been in place  for years and  are welcomed 

uses in the community.  The Commission  believes that the establishment  of a C1-2 commercial 

overlay district in ths blockfi-ont will bring this long existing  commercial  blockfront into 

conformance with the zoning. 

The  Commission believes the rezoning of Sub-Area 3  from an R4 District to  an R3A District 

better reflects the  existing development in the  six-block sub-area by preventing multi-family and 

attached housing types and supporting  the one- and two-family detached dwellings constructed 

on relatively narrow lots. 

12 

C  020629 ZMQ 

Similarly, the Commission  believes that rezoning Sub-Area 4  from an R3-2 District to  an R3-1 

District will enhance the character of this  five-block  sub-area by limiting development to  one- or 

two-family detached or semi-detached dwellings.  The rezoning of this  area will therefore 

prevent out  of character developments and allow for new developments  or expansions to be 

similar in building type and  scale to  existing developments in the immediate area. 

The Commission notes the prevalence of single-family detached  homes in  Sub-Area 5, despite 

the fact  that the  existing zoning, R3-2,  allows for the development of  multifamily dwellings that 

are either attached,  semi-detached,  or detached.  Additionally, the Commission notes the existing 

covenants on many of the homes in the sub-area that limit  their development to single-family 

detached residences.  The Commission believes  rezoning Sub-area 5  from  an R3-2 District to  an 

R2 District will reinforce the single-family  detached character  of homes in the sub-area, and 

allow for future development that complements the pattern. 

The Commission  further notes the only vacant site  in study  area is located  in Sub-Area  5.  The 

Commission recognizes that under the existing R3-2  zone a two- to three-story structure 

containing five units  could be developed, whereas, under the proposed R2 District, development 

would be limited to a two-  to  three-story single-family structure. 

In summary, the Commission believes that the proposed  zoning changes ultimately consolidate 

existing building scale and building types,  primarily as  either one- and  two-family rowhouses or 

single-family detached dwellings, thereby, allowing zoning to better reflecting the existing 

13 

C 020629  ZMQ 

development in these portions  of the Forest Hills and Rego Park neighborhoods. 

RESOLUTION 

