 

On April 23, 2003  (Calendar No.  11), the City Planning Commission  scheduled May 7, 2003, for 

a public  hearing on this application (  C 030297  ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on May 7, 

2003  (Calendar No.  17).  There were four speakers  in favor and  none opposed to the  application. 

The first speaker, the Councilman  of the district, who  is a resident of Holliswood, spoke of the 

unique character of the neighborhood.  He described the recent development trends that have been 

disruptive  to that character. Three representatives from the Holliswood neighborhood and the 

5 

C  030297 ZMQ 

local  civic association testified in favor of the  application and reiterated  the association's request 

for a zoning designation that reflects the density and character  of the existing neighborhood. 

Additionally, they discussed the new  development that has been occurring in the neighborhood 

and  its adverse impact to the character of Holliswood. 

There were no other speakers and the  hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning  Map is appropriate. 

The Commission  believes that the proposed zoning changes will support the established and 

unique character of the  Holliswood section of Queens.  The  Commission notes that Holliswood 

has a hilly setting and a winding  street network and  it is a fully developed neighborhood 

consisting of single-family homes set upon irregularly configured parcels. 

The Commission furthers notes  that under the current R2 zoning designation the neighborhood is 

subject to development that could replace the existing  homes with houses that are more dense 

than the predominate pattern of development.  The Commission  believes that the zoning changes 

will guide new developments and alterations  to be more harmonious with  the existing density in 

the Holliswood neighborhood. 

The Commission  believes the proposed zoning map amendments will reinforce  the existing 

6 

C 030297 ZMQ 

neighborhood character by allowing  development to  be at  a density more compatible with the 

neighborhood's current condition. The Commission notes that the proposed R1-2 district  allows 

for the  same housing type as the  R2 district but with a larger lot area requirement.  The 5,700 

square feet minimum lot area requirement in  an R1-2 ensures that future development will be a 

more compatible with  the existing pattern of development.  The Commission also notes that the 

proposed rezoning will merely extend the R1-2  from the  Jamaica Estates neighborhood to the 

west to  include Holliswood. The  Commission further believes that the rezoning of the two blocks 

that  contain the Holliswood Garden Apartments from R2 to and  R3-2 better reflects  the existing 

development on these blocks as garden apartments  are common  in the R3-2 district. 

In  summary, the Commission believes that the proposed zoning changes will provide  orderly 

growth and  development that will complement  the building type  and density currently found  in 

Holliswood. 

RESOLUTION 

