

On September 10, 2003 (Calendar No. 6), the City Planning Commission scheduled September 24,

2003, for a public hearing on this application (C 030509 HUQ).  The hearing was duly held on

September 24, 2003 (Calendar No. 16), in conjunction with the public hearings on the applications for

the related actions (C 030433 MMQ), (C 030510 ZMQ) and (C 030511 HAQ).  

There were 10 speakers in favor of the application and 7 speakers in opposition. A representative from

HPD, the developer, the architect, the District Manager of CB #14, a legislative aid, representatives for

the local Council member,  Borough President, Addabbo Health Center, Audubon Society, and a

resident all spoke in favor of the applications.

The representative from HPD described the proposed development and addressed the conditions

recommended by the community board and borough president. The architects gave a general

description of the design principles employed in this project.

There were two representatives from the development team, and they described the 30,000 square foot

63

C 030509 HUQ

 
 
community facility being built and the financing of the project.

The District Manager from Community Board 14 spoke in favor of this project and described the need

for market rate housing in Rockaway. He explained that this project is adjacent to 3,000 public housing

units and this project could provide jobs to many of these residents. He stated that the community is

supportive of the partnership housing currently being built in the Edgemere URA and that there is a

need for the market rate housing that this project will bring. 

A legislative aid, representing the Council Member from the 31st District stated that the Council

Member supports the project but has concerns that more affordable housing is not being offered. A

representative from the Borough President testified in favor of the application and stressed that the

Borough President wants to be assured that her conditions would be addressed by HPD.

The Executive Director of the Addabbo Health Center and the Director of the NYC Audubon Society

testified in favor of the application. The Audubon Society representative stated that the development of

the nature preserve in the central park is key to building community sustainability.

A resident from the community spoke in favor of the application and supports the central park nature

preserve. He stated that he would not want additional access points in the central park and would

prefer that it remained a passive park.

64

C 030509 HUQ

Those speaking in opposition included two representatives from a local church and five community

residents. The representatives from the church contended that this project would cause gentrification to

occur in the Rockaways and that affordable housing should be set aside within the proposed

development. This representative also voiced her concern that the 800-seat school being built as part of

this project will not be enough to serve the needs of the urban renewal area. 

The residents that spoke in opposition of the project were concerned about the environmental impacts

of this project. One resident stated the DEIS inadequately addressed the environmental affects to the

endangered species in the URA. He noted that the DEIS lacked comparable analysis of nesting

settlements to those found in Breezy Point, and he suggested that all proposed housing be removed

from the Eastern End, with 24 hour coverage be provided during the nesting season. 

The next resident that spoke in opposition stated that this project violates the Coastal Zone

Management Act of 1972 by closing city streets and that when the City condemned this property in

1967 it did not pay fair market price.

The next resident to speak against this project voiced her concern of the privatization of the land and

public beaches of New York City. She stated that the Coastal Zone Management Act mandates

priority of the Rockaways for public access to the beach.

A resident spoke in opposition of this project and he stated that this proposal is inconsistent with the

65

C 030509 HUQ

Consolidated Plan and that the DEIS is flawed. The last resident to speak against this project

expressed his concerns about access and the quality of development.   

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed.

Waterfront Revitalization Program Consistency Review

This application, in conjunction with the applications for the related actions, was reviewed by the

Department of City Planning for consistency with the policies of the New York City Waterfront

Revitalization Program (WRP), adopted by the Board of Estimate on September 30, 1982 (Calendar

No. 17), pursuant to the New York State Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of

1981 (New York State Executive Law, Section 910 et seq.).  The designated WRP number is 03-017.

This action was determined to be consistent with the policies of the New York City Waterfront

Revitalization Program.

CONSIDERATION

The Commission believes that the Second Amendment  Urban Renewal Plan for the Arverne Urban

Renewal Area are appropriate.

This action, in conjunction with the related actions (C 030433 MMQ), (C 030510 ZMQ) and (C

030511 HAQ), would facilitate the development of the Arverne Urban Renewal Area with 3,900

dwelling units and 770,000 square feet of commercial space.

66

C 030509 HUQ

Objectives of the Second Amendment to the Arverne Urban Renewal Plan include: redeveloping the

Area in a comprehensive manner, removing blight, and maximizing the appropriate land use; removing

impediments to land assemblage and orderly development; providing new housing of high quality;

strengthen the tax base of the City; and to remove or rehabilitate substandard and insanitary structures.

The Commission believes that proposed amendment to the Urban Renewal Plan, in conjunction with

the related applications are consistent with the plan’s objectives. 

The Commission believes that the proposal would contribute to a comprehensive and well-balanced

planning strategy that encourages future residential growth and commercial vitality. 

The Commission acknowledges that the underlying zoning of an R6 would remain the same

and that the proposed Zoning Map amendments are essentially modifications that seek to adapt zoning

to the newly proposed street plan. The Commission believes that updating the commercial overlay

districts in the area is a vital component of the comprehensive plan.

The Commission believes that the proposed urban renewal plan changes for the eastern end of the

Arverne site would allow the development of 500,000 square feet of commercial space and would

promote economic growth in an area that has remained vacant and vastly underutilized for years. The

Commission notes that while a portion of the eastern end will be rezoned to C4-4  the Second

Amended Urban Renewal Plan would restrict residential and community facility development to the

bulk regulations applicable to the R6 district. The Commission further believes that these proposed

67

C 030509 HUQ

changes in the eastern end would encourage development that is consistent with the established goals of

the Urban Renewal Plan, especially the proposed C4-4 district. This zoning district provides a wider

range of uses than the existing R6 and R6/C2-4. The  C2 overlays are intended for those uses typically

along locally oriented retail streets or in small shopping centers. The Commission acknowledges that the

proposed C4-4 district would not restrict the number of commercial stories.

The Commission notes that the Second Amendment to the Arverne Urban Renewal Plan reflects the

current development plan. The plan also enhances the protection for the natural resources by

designating open space sites for nature preserves along the oceanfront and in the central park.  The

Commission believes that the central park nature preserve and dunes preserve would protect

environmental elements unique in the Arverne Urban Renewal Area and prevent development from

occurring on the most sensitive vegetated areas and most valuable habitats. 

The Commission believes that the proposed Arverne-by-the-Sea development in the western end

would create distinct neighborhoods with a range of housing types, allow access to the beach, and

provide public amenities to the new residents while addressing key sensitive environmental issues into

the design principles. The proposed development incorporates the two unique features of the area, the

subway station and ocean, and maximizes its use in the plan. By orienting the development around the

existing New York City subway station  the plan reintroduces transit-oriented development and

provides a direct sight line from this transit hub to the oceanfront that is a tremendous asset to the

Arverne URA. The Commission believes that the development proposal encourages a lively streetscape

68

C 030509 HUQ

for the benefit of visitors and residents. 

The Commission believes the proposal would also benefit the adjacent neighborhoods of Sommerville,

Edgemere and Hammels by returning the vacant URA to productive use and by providing good

ownership opportunities at a scale and density that suits the setting and market. 

The Commission believes that the development would be compatible with the surrounding

neighborhoods, and is consistent with city policy goals in that it would improve access to the waterfront

and provide up to 3,900 units of new housing.

The Commission notes that over the years Rockaway has been the site for a number of public housing

units and government sponsored partnership housing and that the introduction of market rate housing

would serve as a balance for the area. 

Arverne-by-the-Sea would be developed on approximately 117 acres and the development would

include 2,300 market rate dwelling units, 270,000 square feet of retail space, a 30,000 square foot

community center and a 800-seat charter school, the residential units would be divided into 1,162 one-

and two-family homes and 1,138 dwelling units in midrise buildings. 

The Commission believes that the proposed R6/C2-4  district in the western end would allow the

development of a new retail/residential mixed-use neighborhood. The Commission further believes the

69

C 030509 HUQ

proposal would encourage residential and commercial use and enhance economic development. 

The Commission believes that the various changes to the City Map are appropriate. The streets

proposed to be eliminated, discontinued and closed are city-owned and are little used. They are not

necessary to the integrity and function of the street grid in this area. The new street system can

adequately, safely and conveniently carry the reasonably anticipated type and volume of vehicular and

pedestrian traffic, at an acceptable level of service, both now and in the future.

The Commission believes that the network of streets and pedestrian walkways will provide internal

traffic and pedestrian circulation within the residential development. Access to the beach and the

boardwalk is provided at various strategic locations. The delineation of 59 acres of parkland within the

URA is the key feature of the Arverne Development. The central portion of the parkland occupying 35

acres of land will be a nature preserve and 24 acres of parkland adjacent to the Boardwalk will be a

dune preserve. The Commission further believes that this parkland will provide the community with

passive recreation area, deter coastal erosion and buffer the beach from development. 

The Commission acknowledges that the proposal is restricted in the amount of active open space that is

being provided but the Commission notes that the developers of Arverne-by-the-Sea along with HPD

have agreed to develop approximately six acres of active open space throughout the Rockaway

Peninsula. The Commission believes that this additional open space commitment addresses the

community’s concern.

70

C 030509 HUQ

  
In response to comments from the residents that the project would adversely impact the environmental

sensitive elements in the area because the project would create potentially greater development of the

area, the Commission notes that the FEIS reviewed the likely impacts of this change in this area, and

the Commission believes that the proposed mitigation measures for the proposed action found in the

FEIS properly address these issues. 

The Commission understands the concern of the Community Board and Borough President relating to

the limited beach access in the currently proposal. As a result of on-going discussion, HPD has agreed

to increase the number of access point throughout the Arverne URA, and the Commission encourages

further discussion between all interested parties. 

While the Commission acknowledges the concerns of the Community Board and Borough President,

these conditions are beyond the Commission’s purview.  However, the Commission encourages HPD

and the development team to continue to  work with the Community Board and the Borough President

to achieve a successful project.  

The Commission believes that the proposal brings an appropriate scale of sustainable and

environmentally responsible development. The Commission further believes that the rezoning action and

related applications provide refinements that further the comprehensive planning goals that were set

forth when the area was designated as an Urban Renewal Area in 1968.

71

C 030509 HUQ

RESOLUTION

