 

On May 12, 2004 (Calendar No. 7), the City Planning Commission scheduled May 26, 2004 for 

a public hearing on this application (C 040273 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on May 26, 

2004 (Calendar No. 25), in conjunction with the public hearing on the application for the related 

action  (N  040272  ZRQ).    There  was  one  speaker  in  favor  of  the  application,  five  speakers  in 

favor of the application with modifications and three speakers in opposition. 

A resident of Hunters Point who spoke in favor of the rezoning asserted that other areas of the 

city are better suited to industrial uses and development.  The speaker expressed support that the 

zoning  changes  would  provide  an  opportunity  for  the  Hunters  Point  neighborhood  to  reach  its 

potential given its advantageous location and unique characteristics. 

Those  speakers  in  favor  of  the  application  with  modifications  included  a  representative  of  the 

Municipal Arts Society Planning Center (MAS) and four owners of property within the rezoning 

area.  Several speakers expressed their support for the rezoning of a targeted, 43-block area of 

Hunters  Point,  noting  that  the  area  has  long  been  characterized  by  a  mix  of  uses  and  would 

benefit from flexible zoning that would allow it to evolve. 

19 

          C 040273 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Speaking  in  favor  of  the  rezoning  but  requesting  a  modification  to  the  application  was  a 

representative  of  a  firm  that  manufacturers  plastic  products  in  Hunters  Point  and  owns  several 

properties  in  the  rezoning  area.    The  representative  described  his  firm’s  difficulty  in  securing 

rentals from manufacturing concerns and asserted that that there has been limited market demand 

for industrial use in the area.  In addition, the representative requested that one parcel located at 

the  edge  of  the  rezoning  area  on  5th  Street  along  Anable  Basin  be  removed  from  the  proposed 

rezoning  area.    The  representative  contended  that  without  this  change  the proposal  would  split 

the  zoning  for  the  site  from  adjoining  sites  under  the  firm’s  ownership  which  would  not  be 

rezoned. 

In addition, a representative of homeowners residing on a two-block stretch along the west side 

of  11th  Street  between  45th  and  46th  avenues  expressed  support  for  the  rezoning  initiative  but 

voiced  concern  that  the  higher  density  zone  proposed  for  these  blocks  could  lead  to  the 

demolition  and  replacement  of  the  nineteenth  century,  two-story  row  houses  with  new  six-  to 

eight-story buildings.  Accordingly, the representative requested revisions to the proposal to limit 

the extent of the proposed changes on these two block fronts to more closely match the scale of 

the  existing  buildings.    Specifically,  the  representative  suggested  that  the  proposed  M1-4/R7A 

(4.0 FAR) be changed to M1-4/R6B (2.0 FAR).  Additionally, the representative asked for zones 

of lower density than those proposed on block fronts along the north and south sides of the J.F. 

Murray Playground to protect the light and air to this open space resource. 

Two owners of properties on a block bounded by 48th Avenue, 5th Street, 47th Road and Vernon 

Boulevard  testified  that  the  rezoning  proposal  did  not  go  far  enough  in  increasing  densities  to 

promote new housing in the area.  The homeowner of a multiple family dwelling on 47th Road 

20 

          C 040273 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
argued  for  a  higher  FAR  than  the  2.0  FAR  (M1-4/R6B)  proposed  for  the  midblock.    The 

homeowner maintained that the additional allowable floor area would facilitate redevelopment of 

the property while retaining existing tenants. 

Furthermore,  the  owner  of  industrial  and  commercial  properties  on  48th  Avenue  stated  that 

greater  densities  than  those  proposed  for  the  block  are  necessary  to  stimulate  development 

potential  for  residential  and  commercial  uses.      Citing  the  higher  density  of  developments  at 

Battery  Park  City  and  the  adjacent  Queens  West,  the  property  owner  asserted  that  comparable 

densities  are  necessary  for  this  block  to  insure  availability  of  more  affordable  housing  and  a 

critical mass that would support new businesses in the area. 

Those  speaking  in  opposition  of  the  proposal  were  the  Executive  Director  and  Director  of 

Research of the New York Industrial Retention Network (NYIRN) and a business owner whose 

artisan  and  embroidery  company  is  located  outside  of  the  rezoning  area.    The  business  owner 

expressed  concerns  for  escalating  real  estate  speculation  as  a  result  of  the  rezoning  that  places 

undue pressure on manufacturers in the area.  The testimony supported the creation of Industrial 

Employment Districts to help prevent existing businesses from being forced to move out of the 

city. 

The Executive Director of NYIRN conceded that the proposed rezoning of Hunters Point might 

have  some  merit  in  the  larger  planning  context  aimed  at  transforming  Long  Island  City.  

Nevertheless, the speaker asserted that, in the absence of an overall industrial policy for the area, 

the rezoning would lead to further real estate speculation and drive out viable businesses, either 

directly, should development actually occur, or indirectly through rent increases.  Arguing that 

21 

          C 040273 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programmatic  incentives  are  insufficient  to  stabilize  and  foster  industrial  development  in  Long 

Island  City,  the  speaker  emphasized  the  necessity  for  the  establishment  of  Industrial 

Employment  Districts  as  overlays  in  manufacturing  districts  surrounding  the  rezoning  area 

concomitant to the proposed rezoning action. 

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed. 

Waterfront Revitalization Program Consistency Review 

This application, in conjunction with the application for the related action, was reviewed by the 

Department of City Planning for consistency with the policies of the New York City Waterfront 

Revitalization  Program  (WRP),  adopted  by  the  Board  of  Estimate  on  September  30,  1982 

(Calendar  No.  17),  pursuant  to  the  New  York  State  Waterfront  Revitalization  and  Coastal 

Resources Act of 1981 (New York State Executive Law, Section 910 et seq.).   The designated 

WRP number is 03-068. 

This action was determined to be consistent with the policies of the New York City Waterfront 

Revitalization Program. 

CONSIDERATION 

The  Commission  believes  that  this  amendment  of  the  Zoning  Map,  in  conjunction  with  the 

amendments to the Zoning Resolution, as revised, is appropriate. 

The Commission believes that the proposed zoning changes will foster a vital, compatible mix of 

housing,  light  industry,  commercial  enterprises  and  cultural  activities  in  Hunters  Point  that 

22 

          C 040273 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflects  current  trends  and  activities  in  the  area.    With  regard  to  density  and  built  form,  the 

Commission  considers  the  proposed  zoning  controls  to  be  fitting  and  sensitive  to  the  existing 

built fabric of the neighborhood, particularly in the midblocks.  The Commission also believes 

that  the  amendment  to  the  Zoning  Map,  in  conjunction  with  the  amendments  of  the  Zoning 

Resolution,  will  permit  appropriate  levels  of  residential  and  mixed-use  development  and 

reinvestment  along  important  corridors,  such  as  Jackson  Avenue,  that  are  well-positioned  in 

relation to mass transit and adjacent development areas and will allow for the future growth of 

Long  Island  City.    Establishing  contextual  zoning  districts  throughout  the  rezoning  area  will 

strengthen Hunters Point’s sense of place, enhance its street vitality, and contribute to the city’s 

plans  for  creating  a  successful  business  district  in  the  Long  Island  City  core  centered  around 

Queens Plaza and Court Square.  The Commission further asserts that reinforcing and enhancing 

the neighborhood’s built environment and identity will help to link Hunters Point and the Long 

Island City core to the waterfront and the pivotal development occurring at Queens West. 

The  Commission  believes  that  the  rezoning  proposal  carefully  targets  the  areas  of  the  Hunters 

Point  neighborhood  that  have  long  been  characterized  by  a  mix  of  housing  and  industry.    The 

proposed  zoning  changes  will  expand  the  boundaries  of  the  current  Special  Long  Island  City 

Mixed Use District and the Hunters Point Subdistrict to create buffers and transitions to and from 

the adjacent development areas of Queens West and the Long Island City core centered around 

Court Square and Queens Plaza.  Specifically, three blocks between 2nd and 5th streets, 49th and 

Borden avenues – one of which contains the vacant Pennsylvania Railroad Power Plan and the 

Schwartz Chemical building – would be included within the mixed-use subdistrict as a result of 

the rezoning.  The subdistrict would also extend along the frontages of 5th Street to 46th Avenue.  

The  Commission  believes  that  these  areas  included  within  the  special  district  and  subdistrict 

23 

          C 040273 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would  fittingly  serve  as  a  transition  zone  and  buffer  between  the  high  density  residential 

development anticipated at Queens West and the lower-scaled mix of uses of Hunters Point.  The 

Commission  also  believes  that  extending  the  subdistrict  to  include  the  eastern  side  of  Jackson 

Avenue and the northern frontage of 44th Drive to 11th Street would help to create defining edges 

and transitions along the district’s major corridors leading to and from the Long Island City core. 

The  Commission  believes  that  the  current  zoning  regulations  in  Hunters  Point  have  not 

adequately supported the community’s sizeable housing stock by placing significant restrictions 

and  hard-to-administer 

requirements  on  new 

residential  construction  and 

residential 

enlargements.    Accordingly,  the  Commission  believes  that  the  proposed  amendments  to  the 

Zoning  Map  and  Zoning  Resolution  would  aptly  remove  the  complex  zoning  regulations 

restricting new housing and consequently allow existing homeowners to more easily enlarge and 

secure funding to upgrade their buildings.  Moreover, the Commission believes that the moderate 

increases  in  density  would  create  appropriate  opportunities  for  new  housing  units  that  would 

further support the sizeable existing residential community and bring foot traffic and vitality to 

the neighborhood. 

The Commission believes that the proposed mixed-use zoning provisions for the Hunters Point 

Subdistrict  would  promote  a  broad  range  of  new  cultural,  commercial  and  light  industrial 

activities  in  the  area.    Currently,  the  special  zoning  regulations  governing  the  subdistrict  only 

allow commercial and retail uses  as-of-right  along 5th Street and on  the residential/commercial 

corridors of Vernon Boulevard, Jackson Avenue, 21st Street and 44th Drive.  The City Planning 

Commission  currently  must  grant  special  permits  or  authorizations  for  commercial  and  retail 

uses to be developed elsewhere in the subdistrict.  Recognizing the area’s current trends marked 

24 

          C 040273 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by an important growing arts and creative community, the Commission notes that the proposed 

zoning  would  allow  a  much  more  diverse  range  of  commercial  uses  consistent  with  areawide 

developments,  including  stores,  restaurants,  artist  studios,  small  theaters  and  graphic  design 

offices more widely throughout the neighborhood. 

In addition, the Commission notes that the mixed-use provisions of the Hunters Point Subdistrict 

would make existing light industrial uses conforming uses, allowing them to expand, and would 

permit new light industrial uses to locate in the subdistrict.  The Commission also notes that the 

mixed-use  zones  and  their  corresponding  bulk  regulations  will  either  maintain  or  increase  the 

allowable densities for light industrial and commercial uses throughout the subdistrict. 

The  new  zoning  would  retain  the  existing  density  in  over  40  percent  of  the  rezoning  area, 

primarily located in the midblocks.  Currently,  the predominant housing  type  along these east-

west streets is attached three- and four-story buildings; industrial uses generally occupy one- and 

two-story buildings.  The Commission believes that the M1-4/R6B zoning district proposed for 

most of the area’s midblocks would encourage new three- to five-story buildings that will blend 

in with the existing neighborhood scale.  The Commission also believes that the proposed R6B 

zoning  district  replacing  an  M1-4  light  manufacturing  zone  primarily  for  the  45th  Avenue 

Historic  District  would  further  insure  that  existing  patterns  of  development  on  the  midblocks 

would be reinforced. 

In  addition,  the  Commission  believes  that  the  proposal  establishes  appropriate,  moderately 

higher density zoning districts along wide streets and edge areas close to public transit.  These 

zones,  the  Commission  believes,  would  facilitate  new  residential  and  mixed-use  developments 

25 

          C 040273 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that would afford appropriate transitions from Queens West to Hunters Point.  The moderately 

higher  density  zones  would  also  provide  continuous  and  substantial  street  wall  buildings  for 

block fronts along the neighborhood’s important corridors leading to and from Queens West and 

the Long Island City core including Jackson Avenue, 44th Drive, 5th Street and 11th Street. 

In response to concerns raised during the public review process, the zoning map and zoning text 

amendment applications were revised and filed by the Department of City Planning on June 15, 

2004.    Specifically,  the  revisions  involve  1)  the  removal  from  the  rezoning  area  the  100-foot 

deep block front of Block 26, Lot 21 on 5th Street between 46th Avenue and Anable Basin; 2) a 

change  from  the  originally  proposed  M1-4/R7A  zoning  district  to  an  M1-4/R6B  on  the  two 

westerly block fronts along 11th Street between 45th and 46th avenues; and 3) a change from the 

originally proposed M1-4/R7A zoning district to an M1-4/R6A on the easterly block front along 

11th Street between 45th Road and 46th Avenue and on the northerly block front of 45th Avenue 

100 feet west of 21st Street.  The Commission believes that these revisions provide refinements 

that further the planning goals and objectives of the area. 

The  Commission  notes  that  rezoning  the  100-foot  deep  block  front  on  5th  Street  between  46th 

Avenue and Anable Basin would result in an illogical split zoning lot condition.  Furthermore, 

the Commission believes that the density adjustments on the two westerly block fronts  on 11th 

Street  between  45th  and  46th  avenues  from  an  M1-4/R7A  (4.0  FAR)  zoning  district  to  an  M1-

4/R6B (2.0 FAR) are appropriate considering the built form and scale of the block fronts.  The 

Commission notes that the lower density zone allowing for residential buildings with maximum 

street wall heights of 40 feet and maximum building heights of 50 feet would more closely match 

26 

          C 040273 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the scale of the existing nineteenth century, two-story row houses.  The Commission also notes 

that  this  further  fine-tuning  of  the  proposal  effectively  responds  to  the  community  board’s 

condition that consideration be given to preserve historic residential structures in Hunters Point. 

Additionally, the Commission notes that the change from the M1-4/R7A (4.0 FAR) zone to the 

M1-4/R6A (3.0 FAR) zone on the easterly block front of 11th Street between 45th Road and 46th 

Avenue  and  on  the  northerly  block  front  of  45th  Avenue  100  feet  west  of  21st  Street  would 

encourage new residential and mixed-uses buildings with maximum street wall heights of 60 feet 

and  maximum  building  heights  of  70  feet,  typically  resulting  in  five-to  seven-story  buildings.  

The  Commission  believes  that  this  more  modest  density  would  strike  a  balance  between 

maintaining  an  appropriate  scale  surrounding  the  John  F.  Murray  Playground  and  providing 

housing that is comparable in floor area to existing apartment buildings on or in the vicinity of 

these block fronts. 

The Commission shares the concerns of Community Board 2, the Borough President, the MAS, 

NYIRN  and  a  number  of  speakers  regarding  existing  light  industrial  activities  in  Long  Island 

City.  It notes that the broader Long Island City area contains sizeable sections to the north and 

east  of  the  rezoning  area  that  can  serve  as  a  resource  for  industrial  development.    The 

Commission, therefore, believes that the proposed zoning is an opportunity to strike a desirable 

balance between responding to evolving land use activity in Hunters Point and fortifying Long 

Island City’s concentrations of light industrial operations.  The Commission notes that the zoning 

proposal  limits  the  zoning  changes  to  the  Hunters  Point  neighborhood  which  has  always  been 

characterized by a mix of housing, small businesses and industrial activity.  The adjacent Hunters 

Point Industrial Core to the north and the Sunnyside Yard East area to the east would retain their 

27 

          C 040273 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
light manufacturing zoning designation.  Accordingly, the Commission believes that by clearly 

establishing  an  area  with  flexible,  mixed-use  zoning  rules  and  boundaries  that  match 

predominant development patterns in Hunters Point, the industrial precincts to the north and east 

would thereby be reinforced in their distinctive roles as active manufacturing districts. 

In  response  to  suggestions  that  Industrial  Employment  Districts  be  established  as  overlays  in 

manufacturing zones as an appropriate way to provide for industry, the Commission notes that 

the  Department  of  City  Planning  is  presently  reviewing  the  text  for  Industrial  Employment 

Districts as proposed by MAS and NYIRN to evaluate pertinent issues and concerns for further 

discussion  with  these  organizations.    Moreover,  the  Commission  notes  that  the  Department  of 

City  Planning  will  continue  to  work  closely  with  the  New  York  City  Economic  Development 

Corporation, the Long Island Business Development Corporation and local businesses to identify 

additional steps that would insure that the area’s industrial precincts retain their concentration of 

active manufacturing uses. 

In response to Community Board 2’s stipulation that no type of signage shall be allowed more 

than  30  feet  above  street  level,  the  Commission  notes  that  the  proposed  changes  will 

substantially reduce the maximum height of signs from the current limit of 75 feet above curb 

level  to  a  new  limit  of  40  feet  above  curb  level.    The  new  height  limit  will  be  consistent  with 

changes  implemented  for  the  adjacent  Queens  Plaza  Subdistrict  in  2001,  and  the  Commission 

believes  it  is  desirable  to  maintain  consistency  with  this  height,  especially  along  the  Jackson 

Avenue corridor, which is a key thoroughfare in the Queens Plaza and Hunters Point subdistricts. 

28 

          C 040273 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
RESOLUTION 

