

On May 26, 2004 (Calendar No.7), the City Planning Commission scheduled June 9, 2004, for a

public hearing on this application (C 040115 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on June 9, 2004

(Calendar No.10).  There were two speakers in favor of the application and none in opposition.

The Chair of the Community Board, which is a co-applicant of the proposed rezoning, described the

3

C 040115 ZMQ

intent of the rezoning action, the potential effects the existing R3-2 zoning would have on the

neighborhood with respect to housing character, traffic impact and congestion and addressed the

need to retain single-family areas in the city.  The secretary of the Royal Ranch Civic Association,

also a co-applicant, spoke about the efforts made to reach an agreement with the affected property

owners who wanted to retain the R3-2 zoning.  She advised the Commission that at a June 4, 2004

meeting, members of the association, including most of the affected property owners, voted in favor

of modifying the proposed zoning district from R2 to R3X.  She submitted a copy of a petition in

support of the modification with signatures of seven of the affected property owners. 

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed.

CONSIDERATION

The Commission believes that the application for amendment of the Zoning Map, as modified herein,

is appropriate.

The Commission notes that the properties in the rezoning area were developed about 50 years ago

as single-family detached houses, along with just over 100 other properties in the rest of the Royal

Ranch development.  The Commission also notes that most of the Royal Ranch community is

zoned R2, but these 13 properties are part of a larger R3-2 district established in 1961 that covers

the surrounding area, effectively separating the rezoning area from the rest of the Royal Ranch

development. 

The Commission is aware that under the R3-2 zoning designation, single-family homes can be

replaced with multi-family structures that would be out of context with the surrounding development. 

It is also aware that one of the single-family properties proposed for rezoning was redeveloped as-

of-right with four units in two semi-detached structures and that one of the other properties proposed

4

C 040115 ZMQ

for rezoning was converted from a one- to two-family home.  

The Commission acknowledges that the intent of the civic association in filing this application was to

prevent replacement of the remaining eleven detached homes with semi-detached structures and it

shares their concern about preserving the character of the neighborhood.  The Commission was

informed that affected property owners testified at both the community board and Borough President

public hearings that they purchased their properties knowing that the R3-2 zoning would allow

additional dwelling units as-of-right and that the proposed R2 zoning designation would limit their

ability to expand.    

The Commission carefully considered the interests of the affected property owners but also shares

the concerns of the Borough President that retaining the existing R3-2 could possibly diminish the

future character of the Royal Ranch neighborhood.  The Commission recognizes that the need to 

protect low-density neighborhoods is critical to the strength and diversity of the city.  For these

reasons, the Commission has modified the application to rezone the subject properties from R2 to

R3X.  The Commission believes that the R3X zoning district, which allows only one- or two-family

detached homes on 35 foot wide lots with a minimum lot area of 3,325 square feet, would best

reflect the detached character of the homes in the Royal Ranch development.  The R3X district, with

an FAR of 0.6 and its lot width and lot area requirements, would eliminate the possibility of

subdivision on most of the lots and allow the affected property owners of one-family homes in the

rezoning area to add an additional unit as-of-right. The Commission believes the modification would

be consistent with the residential character of the neighborhood and would meet the needs and

goals of both the co-applicants and affected property owners.  The Commission believes the

modification will also ensure that future residential development would be consistent in scale and

context with the area’s detached homes. 

5

C 040115 ZMQ

RESOLUTION

