

On July 28, 2004 (Calendar No. 15), the City Planning Commission scheduled August 11, 2004 for a

public hearing on this application (C 040446 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on August 11, 2004

(Calendar No. 20).  There was one speaker in favor of the application and none in opposition. 

A resident of Brookville who is also a member of Community Board 13 spoke about the neighborhood

character and how recent construction trends were negatively impacting the quality of life in the

Brookville area. He stated that the proposed zoning would preserve the area’s one- and two-family

character and legalize the area’s commercial uses.  He also mentioned the manufacturing zone and why

it wasn’t included in the proposal.

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed.

Waterfront Revitalization Program Consistency Review

This application was reviewed by the Department of City Planning for consistency with the policies of

the New York City Waterfront Revitalization Program (WRP), as amended, approved by the New

York City Council on October 13, 1999 and by the New York State Department of State on May 28,

2002, pursuant to the New York State Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of 1981

(New York State Executive Law, Section 910 et seq.).  The designated WRP number is WRP #04-

046.

This action was determined to be consistent with the policies of the New York City Waterfront

Revitalization Program.

6

C 040446 ZMQ

CONSIDERATION  

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate.

The Commission acknowledges the concerns of the community to preserve the established low-density

character of the neighborhood and is aware that under the existing R3-2 zoning designation, one- and

two-family  homes can be replaced with multifamily structures that would be out of character with the

surrounding development.   The Commission believes the proposed zoning map amendments will

address that issue and reinforce the neighborhood character by allowing development to be at a density

and housing type that is more compatible with existing conditions.

Under the proposed R3-1 and R4B zoning districts, the Commission notes that multifamily apartment

buildings will no longer be permitted and that new residential development will be limited to one- and

two-family homes in structures that reflect the area’s existing patterns. The provisions of the proposed

R3-1 district would limit new buildings to detached and semi-detached, one- and two-family structures.

Within the proposed R4B area, the Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for attached one- and two-family housing

would be increased to 0.9.  As a result, the Commission has determined that the R4B zoning would

better reflect the existing row house development and increase the number of existing homes in

compliance with the R4B zoning regulations for floor area ratio.  

The Commission notes that under the C2 district regulations, Use Groups 7, 8, 9 and 14 are permitted

and would allow motels, wholesale establishments, auto supply, home maintenance or repair and other

services.  Replacing the C2 district with a C1-3 overlay district would preclude those uses that have

wide range of services not involving regular local shopping.  The proposed C1-3 overlay districts would

reinforce the local nature of existing services.  

The Commission believes that the proposed R3-1 and R4B zoning districts would preserve the existing

housing type in Brookville and that the proposed action is intended to stabilize the one- and two-family

character of the neighborhood.  The Commission also notes that existing development generally

conforms and complies with the proposed R3-1 and R4B zoning district regulations and that the

7

C 040446 ZMQ

rezoning actions would ensure that future development would be within an envelope that better reflects

the existing built form.  The Commission also believes that the proposed C1-3 commercial overlay

districts will bring existing commercial uses into conformance and reinforce the local nature of the uses. 

The Commission has determined that these actions  would be consistent with the land use in the area,

maintaining its prevailing character without precluding future residential development opportunities.  

RESOLUTION

