

On May 26, 2004 (Calendar No. 6), the City Planning Commission scheduled June 9, 2004, for a

public hearing on this application (C 040344 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on June 9, 2004

(Calendar No. 9).  There was one speaker in favor of the application and none in opposition.  The

Chair of Community Board 13 spoke about the character of the Bellerose neighborhood and how

recent construction trends were altering and negatively impacting that character. He testified about

how contextual zoning would preserve the area’s one- and two-family character.  

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed.

CONSIDERATION

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate.

The proposed zoning changes will support and reinforce the low-density character of the Bellerose

neighborhood and ensure that future residential development will be consistent in scale and

context with the area’s detached one-and two-family homes.

The Commission understands that under the R3-2 zoning designation, existing single-family

homes can be replaced with multifamily structures that would be out of context with the

surrounding one- and two-family homes.  The Commission notes that under the proposed R2 and

R3A zoning districts new residential development would be limited to detached homes which

reflect the area’s existing development patterns and density.

The Commission believes that the proposed Zoning Map amendments will reinforce the

neighborhood character by allowing development to be at a density more compatible with existing

conditions.  The Commission is aware that the minimum lot width and lot area requirements under

R2 zoning would reduce the potential for assembling and subdividing underdeveloped lots and

4

C 040344 ZMQ

eliminate conversions of existing structures from one- to two-family homes.  The proposed R2

zoning will ensure that any redevelopment will be a building type and at a density that is consistent

with the area’s development pattern.  

The Commission is also aware that the R3A zoning will better reflect the existing residential built

form. Minimum lot width and lot area requirements under R3A are lower than those required for

detached homes under the existing R3-2 zoning and that compliance with bulk, lot area and lot

width requirements will either be unchanged or higher under the proposed R3A regulations. The

Commission notes that new residential units could still be created under the proposed R3A

regulations by converting single-family homes to two-family dwellings.

The Commission believes that the proposed R2 and R3A zoning districts would preserve the

existing detached housing type in Bellerose and that the proposed action is intended to stabilize

the one- and two-family character of the neighborhood.  The Commission also notes that existing

development generally conforms and complies with the proposed R2 and R3A zoning district

regulations and that the rezoning action would ensure that future development or expansion of

existing homes would be within an envelope that better reflects the existing built form.  The action

would be consistent with the land use in the area, maintaining its prevailing character without

precluding future residential development opportunities.  

RESOLUTION

