 

On February 2, 2005, Calendar No. 8, the City Planning Commission scheduled February 

16, 2005 for a public hearing on this application (C 050194 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly 

held on February 16, 2005 (Calendar No. 14).  There were five speakers in favor of the 

application and none in opposition. 

The speakers represented the United Neighbors Civic Association (UNCA), The Queens 

Civic Congress and community residents.  In general, the speakers spoke of the need to 

address overdevelopment and the increasing demolition of sound one- and two- family 

detached homes in their community.   An executive board member of UNCA described 

the organization’s participation in the rezoning effort, and the potential impacts of 

overdevelopment on parking, the existing infrastructure, community resources and 

neighborhood character.   A representative of the Queens Civic Congress stated that the 

proposed zoning changes would prevent inappropriate out-of-character development, and 

5 

C 050194 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
urged that new regulations be considered to protect single family row-house 

development, a predominant housing type in Queens. 

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate. 

The Springfield Gardens neighborhood is primarily developed with one- and two- family 

detached and semi-detached homes.  The current zoning, however, permits the new 

construction of multifamily and row house development, housing types that are not 

consistent with the existing neighborhood context. 

The Commission notes that the proposed R3-1 and R3X districts would restrict future 

residential development to one- and two- family detached and semi-detached homes, and 

would therefore ensure that future development would be consistent with the prevailing 

neighborhood character. 

The Commission believes that the proposed R3-1 and R3X districts would ensure that 

future development or expansion of existing homes would be within an envelope that 

better reflects the area’s existing context.  The action would be consistent with the land 

use in the area, maintaining its prevailing character without precluding future residential 

development opportunities.   

6 

C 050194 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESOLUTION 

