

On December 22, 2004 (Supplemental Calendar Cal. No. 1), the City Planning Commission scheduled

January 5, 2005, for a public hearing on this application (C 050153 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on

January 5, 2005 (Calendar No. 15).  There were five speakers in favor of the application and three

speakers in opposition.

A Community Board 9 representative spoke in favor of the rezoning and stressed the strong community

support for the project, noting that it was unanimously approved at the November 23, 2004 CB 9 meeting. 

 Also, the representative stated the community’s concern that its schools and streets are overcrowded and

that homes are being torn down and replaced by apartments.  A Kew Gardens Homeowner Association

representative distributed a book on the history of Kew Gardens to all Commissioners.  He stated he

supports the rezoning in order to maintain the quality of life and appeal of the built environment in the

21

C 050153 ZMQ

neighborhood.  A representative from the Kew Gardens Improvement Association stated that this ULURP

application was the first application in many years to receive a unanimous, favorable vote in Community

Board 9.  The representative stated that the rezoning would help Kew Gardens remain a vibrant and

growing community with new long-term housing opportunities.  A neighborhood resident stated he

agreed with the previous speakers.  Finally, the Kew Gardens Civic Association president stated that Kew

Gardens is an attractive place to live because of its mix of housing types and people and that he believes

this rezoning is a stepping stone in preserving New York City as a whole.  

The attorney for the owners of a property located within the rezoning area at 83-30 Austin Street stated

support for the overall proposed rezoning, but the proposed boundaries between the new R4-1and R7A

districts should be adjusted for this site.  She explained the property is leased by the United States Postal

Service with a term through mid-2006, and the owners would like to consider a residential development

of the site that would be precluded if it were to be rezoned as proposed from an R7-1 district with a C1-2

commercial overlay to an R4-1 district with a C1-3 commercial overlay.  She noted that seven-story

apartment buildings are adjacent to one side of the site and directly across the street. 

The architect retained by the owners of the property at 83-30 Austin Street asked that the Commission

look at the impact of rezoning the site on which he believed would not have commercial uses for the site

if the post office were to leave.  The architect believed that the highest and best use for the site would be a

7-story apartment building with 24 units with below grade parking and that this type of building cannot

be erected under the proposed zoning. Finally, the owner of the 83-30 Austin Street property agrees with

the community on the need to rezone the area but believes the property would be better suited to the area

as multi-family residential as that is what surrounds the property.  The owner stated that the consequences

of rezoning the site will negatively affect the community.

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed.

CONSIDERATION

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate.

22

C 050153 ZMQ

The Commission believes that this rezoning action represents a comprehensive zoning strategy for the

neighborhoods of Kew Gardens and Richmond Hill and will reinforce established built contexts and

prevent out-of-character development, recognize existing residential development in locations where such

development is currently prohibited and foster higher density residential and mixed-use development in

appropriate locations near transit.

The Commission acknowledges that there are currently residential uses in manufacturing zones in the

study area, and that rezoning these areas where residential uses predominate will bring the residential uses

into conformance and will not negatively affect current or future manufacturing or residential

development.

The Commission notes that the Jamaica Avenue corridor as well as the area directly adjacent to the

intersections of Hillside Avenue, Metropolitan Avenue and Kew Gardens Road area are both well served

by public transportation and will be able to best support the residential and commercial growth needed by

the Kew Gardens and Richmond Hill communities.

The proposed zone for the Jamaica Avenue corridor from 102nd Street to 130th Street is an R6A zone

with a C2-4 commercial overlay.  The R6A zoning would encourage new, higher density residential

developments and mixed-use buildings along Jamaica Avenue that would better reinforce its traditional

development patterns than the existing R3-1, R5, and M1-1 districts with C1-2 and C2-2 commercial

overlays.

Fourteen full and partial blocks located east of the LIRR tracks from Hillside to Jamaica Avenues,

including portions of blocks between the Van Wyck Expressway and 134th Street and Jamaica Avenue

and 89th Avenue, would be changed from existing R4, R5 and M1-1 districts to an R6 district. The

proposed R6 zoning district with a C2-3 commercial overlay would reflect the commercial uses of the

area while also providing opportunities for growth by allowing higher density residential and mixed-use

buildings. 

23

C 050153 ZMQ

Finally, the Commission believes that the proposed commercial overlay changes reflect existing

commercial development and will facilitate commercial redevelopment in this area.

Regarding the testimony of the property owner at 83-30 Austin Street, the Commission notes that the

proposed R4-1 district with a C1-3 commercial overlay accurately reflects its current use and is consistent

with this objective for this portion of the rezoning area.  The Commission believes it is not appropriate to

consider the property owner’s request at this time.  The proposed extension of the R7A to include the

subject property is outside the scope of the current application.  While ULURP has provisions to deal

with such instances, the Commission believes that allowing the property owner’s proposal to go through a

full and separate ULURP review would be the best way to deal with the request.

RESOLUTION
