 

On May 25, 2005 (Calendar No. 10), the City Planning Commission scheduled June 8, 2005, for a public 

hearing on this application (C 050400 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on June 8, 2005 (Calendar No. 

22), in conjunction with the public hearing on the application for the related action (N 050401 ZRY).  

There were two speakers in favor of the application. 

The president of the Cambria Heights Civic Association described the collaborative efforts of the 

  12                                                                               

   C 050400 ZMQ 

 
             
 
 
 
 
 
community, elected officials and the Department of City Planning to produce a rezoning proposal that 

was unanimously supported by the community.  He stated that the proposed zoning changes protect the 

community from overdevelopment, but allow modest development opportunities.  He stated there were 

sections of the neighborhood where existing single-family homes can add an additional unit and that there 

were multiple dwellings in parts of the community that continue to provide rental housing.  He also 

explained how the community was fully informed about the implications of each of the proposed zoning 

districts.    

The Chairman of Community Board 13 spoke about the full support of the proposal by the board and 

elected officials.  He stated that the rezoning proposal will maintain the exceptional quality of housing in 

southeast Queens and that the Community Board has officially requested similar contextual rezoning 

studies for other areas in the district. 

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that the application for an amendment to the Zoning Map, in conjunction with 

the amendments to the Zoning Resolution as modified herein, is appropriate. 

The Commission believes that the proposed R2A, R3-A, R3-1 and R4B zoning districts more closely 

reflect the area’s development patterns and that the zoning changes will preserve the low-density 

character of the neighborhoods.  The Commission recognizes that the existing R3-2 and R4 zoning does 

not correspond to the one- and two-family character of Cambria Heights and that these zoning districts 

could create an incentive to replace such structures with multi-family dwellings.   

  13                                                                               

   C 050400 ZMQ 

 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Commission notes that the R4B, R3-1 and R3A zoning district regulations limit new residential 

development to one- and two-family occupancy.   The Commission also notes that the proposed Zoning 

Map amendments will better reflect the area’s existing detached, semi-detached and rowhouse building 

characteristics.  The Commission believes that these zoning changes will reinforce the neighborhood 

character by allowing development to be at a density more compatible with existing conditions.   The 

Commission also notes that the proposed R2A zoning district will better protect the existing character of 

the single-family area by ensuring that enlargements and new construction will more closely match the 

existing building patterns.   

The Commission believes changing the existing C1-2 and C2-2 commercial overlay districts to C1-3 and 

C2-3 and modifying the depth of the districts from 150 feet to 100 feet would reflect the existing 

commercial building characteristics along Linden Boulevard and would prevent intrusion of commercial 

uses into the residential side streets.   

The Commission believes that the zoning actions would be consistent with land use and development in 

the area and will maintaining the prevailing character of Cambria Heights without precluding future 

residential development opportunities.   

The Commission understands that the proposed zoning text amendments to the R2A zoning regulations 

(N050401 ZRY) will provide more design certainty and will further ensure that new housing will closely 

fit with the established development patterns in the neighborhoods where the R2A district is applied.   

RESOLUTION 

