 

On March 16, 2005 (Calendar No. 18), the City Planning Commission scheduled March 30, 

2005, for a public hearing on this application (C 050195 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held 

on March 30, 2005 (Calendar No. 32).  There were three speakers in favor of the application 

and none in opposition. 

The speakers represented the Kissena Park Civic Association.  In general, the speakers spoke 

of  the  need  to  address  overdevelopment  and  the  increasing  demolition  of  sound  one-  and 

two-family  detached  homes  in  their  community.      The  secretary  of  the  Kissena  Park  Civic 

Association stated that the rezoning was necessary to preserving the neighborhood’s historic 

character.    The  civic  group’s  zoning  chairman  described  the  organization’s  participation  in 

the  rezoning  effort,  and  the  potential  impacts  of  overdevelopment  on  community  resources 

and neighborhood character.   The association’s vice-president also emphasized her support 

for the rezoning plan. 

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate. 

The  Kissena  Park  neighborhood  is  primarily  developed  with  one-  and  two-family  detached 

houses.  The current zoning, however, permits the new construction of semi-detached, multi-

5 

C 050195 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
family  and  attached  rowhouse  buildings  that  are  not  consistent  with  the  existing 

neighborhood context. 

The  Commission  notes  that  the  proposed  R2,  R3A,  and  R3X  districts  would  restrict  future 

residential development to one- or two-family detached homes, thereby, ensuring that future 

development would be consistent with the prevailing neighborhood character. 

The Commission believes that the proposed R2, R3A,  and  R3X  districts  would  ensure  that 

future development or expansion of existing homes would be within an envelope that better 

reflects the area’s existing context.  The action would be consistent with the land use in the 

area, maintaining its prevailing character without precluding future residential development 

opportunities.   

RESOLUTION 

