 

On July 27, 2005 (Calendar No. 4), the City Planning Commission scheduled August 10, 2005, for a 

public hearing on this application (C 050482 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on August 10, 2005 

(Calendar No. 20).  There was one speaker in favor and one speaker in opposition. 

15 

          C 050482 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The City Councilmember from the 19th District spoke in favor of the application. He explained that unless 

this long overdue rezoning is approved, development pressures will inalterably change the character of 

the community creating higher densities with related traffic and parking concerns on the existing narrow 

street grid.   

A homeowner’s statement was read by his son, and the owner opposed the rezoning of his property from 

R3A to R2A.  The homeowner contended that the proposed zoning change would make the currently 

allowed two-family occupancy of his house non-conforming, and it would prevent him from subdividing 

his lot as he had long-planned to do.  Additionally, he pointed out that several lots north of his were 

developed as two-family homes.   

There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed. 

Waterfront Revitalization Program Consistency Review 

This application was reviewed by the Department of City Planning for consistency with the policies of the 

New York City Waterfront Revitalization Program (WRP), as amended, approved by the New York City 

Council on October 13, 1999 and by the New York State Department of State on May 28, 2002, pursuant 

to the New York State Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of 1981 (new York State 

Executive Law, Section 910 et seq.). The designated WRP number is 05-043. 

This action was determined to be consistent with the New York City Waterfront Revitalization Program. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that the application for an amendment to the Zoning Map, as modified herein, 

is appropriate. 

The Commission notes that the properties in the rezoning area are characterized predominantly by 

16 

          C 050482 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detached, one- and two-family residences.  The Commission also notes that existing zoning designations 

of R4, R3-2, R3X, M1-1 and M2-1 do not accurately reflect established development patterns in much of 

College Point and, in many instances, are allowing out-of-character new developments. The Commission 

believes that comprehensively updating the area=s zoning designations is required to protect the 

established character and quality of life in the neighborhood and ensure that new development is 

consistent with the scale of surrounding buildings.  The Commission believes that the proposed R2A, R3-

1 and R4A districts and the extension of existing R3A, R4-1 and R5B zones will more closely reflect the 

area’s development patterns and better preserve the low-density character of the neighborhood.  

The Commission notes that the proposed R2A zoning would limit new development to single-family 

detached structures and that the regulations of this zone restrict floor area deductions and impose limits on 

building wall heights and lot coverage in order to prevent over-scaled alterations and new construction.  

The Commission believes that this zone will protect the existing single-family character in the areas 

where it is proposed and ensure that enlargements and new buildings will be more closely in scale with 

surrounding buildings.  

The Commission carefully considered the testimony at its public hearing that portions of blocks where the 

R2A zone is proposed are less consistent in their single-family, detached development pattern, and 

consequently is modifying the application for the block front on the north side of 9th Avenue between 

119th Street and College Place and the block front on the west side of College Place between a between 8th 

Avenue and 9th Road to remove these areas from the proposed R2A zone and retain their R3A zoning.  

The Commission believes this modification is appropriate given the existing mix of one- and two-family 

residential developments on these block fronts.  

The Commission believes that the proposed extension of the R5B zoning district on College Point 

Boulevard would ensure that future development would complement and reinforce the existing character 

17 

          C 050482 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of the boulevard.  The Commission notes that the range of detached, semi-detached and attached building 

types and maximum 1.35 FAR allowed by the R5B district are consistent with the existing provisions for 

R4 infill zoning which is available along many of these block fronts.  The Commission believes that 

extending the R5B district to apply on more portions of College Point Boulevard will provide a consistent 

building scale and street wall condition along these corridors.  

The Commission believes that the proposed change from C1-2 and C2-2 to C1-3 and C2-3 commercial 

overlays on College Point Boulevard and the new C1-3 overlay on 14th Avenue between College Point 

Boulevard and 123rd Street  will also better reflect established use patterns and continue to support 

commercial and mixed-use buildings along this corridor.  The Commission also believes that changing 

the existing C2-2 overlay on 18th Avenue to a C2-3 overlay, reducing the depth of the overlay from 150 

feet to 100 feet and eliminating commercial overlays between 125th and 126th streets will better reflect 

existing land use patterns and prevent intrusion of commercial uses onto residential side streets.   

Overall, the Commission recognizes that the need to protect low-density neighborhoods from 

overdevelopment is important to continue to provide a range of housing choices to the City’s residents, 

and the Commission believes that the modified rezoning proposal for College Point incorporates a range 

of contextual zones to ensure that future development will be consistent with the array of building types 

and development patterns that contribute to the distinct character of this community.   

RESOLUTION 

