 

On July 27, 2005, Calendar No. 5, the City Planning Commission scheduled August 10, 

2005  for  a  public  hearing  on  this  application  (C  050511  ZMQ).    The  hearing  was  duly 

held  on  August  10,  2005  (Calendar  No.  21).    There  were  six  speakers  in  favor  of  the 

application and nine in opposition. 

The speakers in favor of the rezoning proposal were community residents.  A member of 

the  West  Lawrence  Civic  Association  spoke  in  support  of  the  proposed  R3-1  to  R4-1 

zoning  change  and  described  the  general  need  of  area  residents  to  enlarge  their  homes.  

Several  members  of  the  Neighbors  of  Mott  Creek  civic  association  expressed  concerns 

regarding current and impending developments that would harm the traditional character 

of the neighborhood, and they asked for a quick resolution of the rezoning process.  Other 

members of the civic association spoke of the limited road access to and through the Mott 

Creek neighborhood, as well as the concern of increased flooding in buildings and streets 

in  the  area.    A  resident  stated  the  rezoning  study  began  nearly  two  years  ago  and 

explained  that  neighborhood  residents  are  not  against  all  development,  but  against 

development  that  destroys  the  character  of  the  neighborhood.    A  member  of  the 

Neighbors  of  Mott  Creek  civic  association  also  explained  that  there  is  water  on  three 

sides of the neighborhood, making access difficult and the area prone to street flooding.  

7 

C 050511 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
Finally, a member of both Community Board 14 and West Lawrence Civic Association 

expressed his support of the rezoning proposal. 

Several housing developers who own property in the Mott Creek area spoke against the 

proposal  on  the  basis  that  the  proposed  rezoning  would  limit  the  number  of  units  they 

would be able to build.  One developer who also owns land in the rezoning area stated 

that  he  was  willing  to  widen  streets  and  add  new  access  routes,  and  also  create  a  new 

beach  habitat  area  with  help  from  the  New  York  State  Department  of  Environmental 

Conservation (DEC).  A Far Rockaway resident testified against the rezoning because she 

believes  that  there  is  a  lack  of  affordable  housing  for  new  families  in  the  area.    A  real 

estate broker active in the area spoke against the rezoning and stated that the area has a 

strong demand  for  new housing.  A representative  of  area developers spoke against the 

rezoning because he believes the downzoning does not reflect that some of the affected 

property lies across the street from a twenty-story, multi-family apartment building and 

he  does  not  think  low-density  residential  development  is  appropriate  for  these  sites.  

Another  speaker  against  the  rezoning  stated  that  he  would  like  to  move  to  the  area  but 

believes  that  the  rezoning  would  make  this  difficult  by  limiting  the  amount  of  housing 

that can be built.   

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed. 

8 

C 050511 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Waterfront Revitalization Program Consistency Review 

This application was reviewed by the Department of City Planning for consistency with 

the policies of the New York City Waterfront Revitalization Program (WRP), as 

amended, approved by the New York City Council on October 13, 1999 and by the New 

York State Department of State on May 28, 2002, pursuant to the New York State 

Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of 1981 (new York State Executive 

Law, Section 910 et seq.). The designated WRP number is WRP 05-055. 

This action was determined to be consistent with the New York City Waterfront 

Revitalization Program. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate. 

The Commission notes that the proposal was developed through a series of meetings with 

the West Lawrence Civic Association and representatives from Community Board 14 and 

Council Member James Sanders' office starting in July 2003 and with the Neighbors of 

Mott Creek starting in April 2004.  The Commission further notes that the full rezoning 

proposal was presented to the community board in February 2005. 

The Far Rockaway and Mott Creek neighborhoods are primarily developed with one- and 

two-  family  detached  and  semi-detached  homes.    However,  the  current  zoning  south  of 

Seagirt  Boulevard  permits  the  new  construction  of  multi-family  and  row  house 

development,  housing  types  that  are  not  consistent  with  the  existing  neighborhood 

9 

C 050511 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
context.    The  current  R3-1  zone  north  of  Seagirt  Boulevard  allows  only  one-  and  two-

family detached and semi-detached development which is consistent with the context of 

the  neighborhood,  but  does  not  allow  residents  the  floor  area  flexibility  they  have 

requested. 

The Commission believes that the R3X, R4A and R4-1 districts proposed to replace the 

existing R5 district would ensure that future development or expansion of existing homes 

would  be  within  building  envelopes  that  better  reflect  the  area’s  existing  context.    The 

Commission  notes  that  the  proposed  R3X  and  R4A  would  limit  future  residential 

development to one- and two- family detached homes, and that the proposed R4-1 district 

would  limit  future  residential  development  to  one-  and  two-family  detached  and  semi-

detached  homes.    The  proposed  rezoning  would  be  consistent  with  the  land  use  in  the 

area,  maintaining  its  prevailing  character  while  continuing  to  provide  future  residential 

development opportunities.   

The  Commission  notes  that  the  R4-1  district  proposed  for  the  area  north  of  Seagirt 

Boulevard would restrict future residential development to one- and two- family detached 

and semi-detached homes.  The maximum allowable FAR in the R4-1 district is 0.9.  This 

proposed zone would therefore ensure that future development would be consistent with 

the  prevailing  neighborhood  housing  type  and  land  use,  but  would  also  allow  property 

owners to enlarge their homes with the proposed increase in FAR from 0.6 to 0.9. 

10 

C 050511 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
The Commission is aware of the several development proposals for the Mott Creek area 

which  have  been  advanced  in  recent  months.    The  Commission  believes  that  the 

significant  amount  of  development  contemplated  under  these  proposals  within  this 

relatively  small  but  distinct  area  threatens  to  overwhelm  and  significantly  alter  the 

character  of  the  neighborhood.    Accordingly,  if  built  under  the  existing  zoning,  these 

developments  would  undermine  the  ability  of  the  zoning  proposal  to  achieve  its  stated 

purposes.    These  proposals  highlight  the  need  for  the  rezoning  to  protect  existing 

neighborhood character. 

The  Commission  has  carefully  considered  the  concerns  of  property  owners  and 

developers of land in the Mott Creek area and has determined that the proposed zoning 

changes would produce new development that would be more characteristic of the low-

density,  detached  housing  type  found  in  the  neighborhood.    The  Commission  believes 

new development in the rezoning area should be of a density which is appropriate for the 

area’s infrastructure, especially the limited road network in the Mott Creek neighborhood 

which has one relatively narrow east-west street (Seagirt Avenue) and a series of cul-de-

sacs that terminate in wetlands, either along the East Rockaway Inlet or Mott Creek.  The 

proposed rezoning would also minimize any negative effects caused by new development 

by  ensuring  that  new  units  would  not  overwhelm  the  existing  infrastructure  and 

ecologically sensitive environs. 

11 

C 050511 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
RESOLUTION 

