 

On May 11, 2005 (Calendar No. 4), the City Planning Commission scheduled May 25, 2005, for a 

14 

C 050277 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
public hearing on this application (C 050277 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on May 25, 2005 

(Calendar No. 35).  There were eight speakers in favor of the application, and three speakers in 

opposition. 

Representatives from the Off-Broadway Homeowners= Association, the Broadway-Flushing 

Homeowners Association and private homeowners spoke in favor of the application with the exception 

of the proposed R6B along Northern Boulevard and Sanford Avenue.  Both groups expressed concern 

that the proposed R6B district would allow too many potential developments and not enough parking to 

support these new developments. 

Three private homeowners from the area spoke in opposition to the rezoning.  One of them felt that the 

rezoning of the area should not occur because the rezoning was not clearly justified.  Another felt that 

the R6B proposed for Northern Boulevard was too much of a high-density zone to be proposed for the 

community.  The last speaker did not want any change to the area to occur. 

There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that the application for amendment of the Zoning Map, as modified herein, is 

appropriate. 

15 

C 050277 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
The Commission notes that the properties in the rezoning area are characterized predominantly by two- 

and two-and-one-half-story residences, mostly containing one or two families, with the exception of 

several apartment buildings (generally four and five stories) along Sanford Avenue and Northern 

Boulevard.  The Commission also notes that the existing zoning designations of R5, R4, R3-2, R2 and 

M1-1, which date to 1961, do not closely reflect development patterns in the East Flushing community 

and in many instances, are allowing out-of-character new developments. The Commission believes that 

comprehensively updating the area=s zoning designations is required to protect the established character 

and quality of life in the neighborhood and ensure that new development is consistent with the scale of 

surrounding buildings. 

The Commission believes that replacing the R2 district on the tier of blocks north of Northern 

Boulevard between 156th and 167th street with an R1-2 district will more accurately reflect the larger lot 

sizes in this area and prevent the replacement of existing structures with two dwellings through lot 

subdivisions.  The Commission also believes the other changes to consolidate the boundaries of the R2 

district south of Northern Boulevard and to extend R2 zoning to the west side of 166th Street south of 

45th Avenue are consistent with the character of development in these areas. 

The Commission believes that the proposed extension of an R5 district to replace R3-2 and M1-1 

zoning and the related changes to commercial overlays will more closely match the patterns of current 

land use and development types in the area south of Roosevelt Avenue and west of 155th and 156th 

streets. 

16 

C 050277 ZMQ 

  
 
 
The Commission believes that the proposed R4-1 and R4A districts would generally ensure that future 

residential development would be consistent with the prevailing one- and two-family development 

pattens and prevent out-of-character multiple-family or attached developments. The Commission 

carefully considered the testimony at its public hearing that certain of the proposed R4A blocks have a 

less consistent one- and two-family detached development pattern, and consequently is modifying the 

application in the area south of Station Road and north of Sanford Avenue between 156th Street and 

161st Street to remove this area from the rezoning and retain the existing R4 zoning.  The Commission 

believes this modification  is appropriate given the existing mix of residential development on these 

blocks.   

The Commission notes that since the R4A district will be retained on the easterly portion of the block 

bounded by Barclay Avenue on the north, 156th Street on the east, Sanford Avenue on the south and 

Murray Street on the west, that the remainder of this block, which contains a primary school, should 

have a consistent zoning treatment, and the Commission is modifying the application to replace the 

proposed R5 district with R4A on the westerly portion of this block. 

In response to the concerns of Community Board 7 and the Borough President regarding the proposed 

R6B district on portions of Northern Boulevard and Sanford Avenue, the Commission is modifying the 

application by changing the proposed zoning to R5B on these blockfronts.  The Commission believes 

that the R5B zoning district, which allows detached, semi-detached and attached houses, with a 

17 

C 050277 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
maximum FAR of 1.35, would ensure that future development would complement the existing character 

of the Sanford Avenue and Northern Boulevard, as well as the 162nd Street corridor where it is also 

proposed.  The Commission notes that building types and maximum FAR allowed by the R5B district 

are consistent with the existing provisions for R4 infill zoning which is available along many of these 

blockfronts.  The Commission believes that  extending the R5B district to apply on more portions of 

Northern Boulevard and Sanford Avenue will provide a consistent building scale and street wall 

condition along these corridors. 

In response to the concerns of Community Board 7 and the Borough President regarding the 50-foot 

extension of the proposed R1-2 district on the west side of 157th Street and the removal of the C2-2 

overlay in this section, the Commission notes that this change is beyond the scope of the proposed 

action.  Similarly the request of the board and the Borough President to extend the proposed R2 district 

100 feet north of 45th Avenue is also beyond the project scope. 

Lastly, the Commission notes that the proposed reduction in depth from 150 feet to 100 feet of certain 

existing C1-2 and C2-2 overlays along Northern Boulevard and 46th Avenue will better relfect existing 

land use patterns and prevent the intrusion of commercial uses onto residential side streets. 

Overall, the Commission recognizes that the need to protect low-density neighborhoods from 

overdevelopment is important to continue to provide a range of housing choices to the City=s residents, 

and the Commission believes that modified rezoning proposal for East Flushing appropriately ensure that 

18 

C 050277 ZMQ 

  
 
 
  
future development will be more consistent with the area=s development patterns and character. 

RESOLUTION 

