 

On October 11, 2006 (Calendar No. 7), the City Planning Commission scheduled October 25, 2006, for a 

public hearing on this application (C 060562 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on October 25, 2006 

(Calendar No. 12) in conjunction with the public hearing on the application for the related action (N 

060563 ZRY).  There were 11 speakers in favor of the this application and 23 in opposition.    

Those in support included the City Council member from the 19th Council District, the presidents of the 

Westmoreland, Douglaston and Little Neck Pines civic associations and eight area residents.   Two of 

those residents were members of Community Board 11 and one was a member of the Douglaston 

Historical Society.    

The councilmember testified in favor of the rezoning, stating he was aware that some Little Neck Hills 

residents were opposed to the R2A zoning change for their area .  He noted that their issues and concerns 

will be considered.   The councilmember also testified in favor of the proposed text amendment, stating 

that it eliminates an unfair burden on homeowners who want to continue alteration work after a rezoning 

becomes effective.  The Councilmember encouraged the Department to propose another text change that 

would apply the same procedure to alterations in all other lower density districts.   

 The civic association presidents testified that their memberships overwhelmingly supported the rezoning 

application.   The president of the Little Neck Pines Association testified that incorrect information about 

the R2A zoning that had been distributed in the community and that residents were misled concerning its 

restrictions.  The president of the Douglaston Civic Association submitted petitions from the association 

membership in support of the proposed rezoning and spoke against the community board‘s 

recommendation to modify the rezoning proposal and alter the R2A text.  The remaining residents who 

favored the rezoning application testified that they supported the changes recommended by the 

15                                                                                                                                            C 060562 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
community board.  They also testified that the proposed zoning districts would prevent dramatic changes 

to the character of their neighborhoods and that new housing would be in context with the community.   

The president of the Westmoreland Civic Association stated he had no objection to the community board 

recommendation to retain R2 zoning in Little Neck Hills. 

There were 23 speakers in opposition to specific aspects of the proposed rezoning.  Twenty speakers 

identified themselves as residents of the Little Neck Hills area between Northern Boulevard and the 

Horace Harding Expressway.  These residents testified that they prefer the existing R2 zoning and the 

buildings that are allowed under that zoning.  They testified that the proposed R2A would limit their 

ability to upgrade and expand their homes.  Some residents testified that many alterations have already 

been completed in Little Neck Hills and that the proposed R2A would impose an unfair limitation on 

homeowners who have not yet expanded.  Others testified that the R2A zoning regulations would make 

properties non-complying and limit their expansion options.   

Two residents of the Little Neck Pines area requested that the six ranch homes on Little Neck Parkway, 
south of 40th Avenue, retain their R3-1 zoning.  The residents testified that Little Neck Parkway is a busy 

thoroughfare and that the surrounding neighborhood context is predominantly row housing and garden 

apartment buildings.  They stated that the R3-1 zoning is necessary for them to expand their homes. 

The owner of a two-story commercial and retail building on Northern Boulevard between 248th and 249th 

streets testified in opposition to the proposed reduction of a C2-2 commercial overlay district.  He stated 

that his building is 146 feet deep and that future rentals on the property would be problematic without the 

commercial zoning. 

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed. 

Waterfront Revitalization Program Consistency Review 

This application was reviewed by the Department of City Planning for consistency with the policies of the 

New York City Waterfront Revitalization Program (WRP), as amended, approved by the New York City 

Council on October 13, 1999 and by the New York State Department of State on May 28, 2002, pursuant 

to the New York State Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of 1981 (New York State 

Executive Law, Section 910 et seq.).  The designated WRP number is 06-039Q. 

16                                                                                                                                            C 060562 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
This action was determined to be consistent with the policies of the New York City Waterfront 

Revitalization Program. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map, as modified herein, in conjunction 

with the amendment to the Zoning Resolution, is appropriate. 

The Commission believes that this rezoning action is a comprehensive zoning strategy for the Douglaston 

and Little Neck neighborhoods that will preserve the area’s predominant low-density character, limit 

subdivision of properties, encourage residential development that reflects and reinforces the area’s 

traditional building patterns and prevent encroachment of commercial development into residential areas.  

The Commission acknowledges that the existing zoning creates an incentive in parts of Douglaston and 

Little Neck to alter the density and character of these areas by replacing detached one- and two-family 

homes with semi-detached or attached multifamily structures.  Changing all or portions of existing R4, 

R3-2, R3-1, R2 and C3 districts to a mix of lower-density and contextual districts that include R1-2, R2, 

R2A, R3X and R4-1 will appropriately reflect the area’s predominant development patterns and its one- 

and two-family character.   

The Commission notes that the R1-1 district zoning district proposed in Douglas Manor is the first to be 

established in the borough of Queens and that the R1-1 zoning will help maintain the area’s low density 

character by limiting lot subdivisions.  The Commission believes that the proposed R1-2 near Udall’s 

Ravine and Udall’s Cove will introduce stricter density controls and provide a framework for new 

development that would limit adverse impacts on those natural areas in the event of future development.   

The Commission believes the proposed zoning text amendment simplifies the process to maintain work 

permits for alterations already underway in new R2A districts.   The Commission  acknowledges that if 

structural framing for an expansion or enlargement is complete on the date the new R2A zoning goes into 

effect, the work permit for the alteration would be allowed to remain in effect. 

17                                                                                                                                            C 060562 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
In response to the recommendations of the Community Board and Borough President and the testimony at 

the Commission’s public hearing, the Commission is approving the rezoning application with three 

modifications. 

The Commission notes that the portion of Little Neck Hills generally bounded by Northern Boulevard, 
Deepdale Place, Morenci Lane and 251st Street, the Horace Harding Expressway and Marathon Parkway 

is currently zoned both R2 and R1-2 and the certified application proposed to rezone the area to R2A.  

The existing R2 district runs along the east side of Marathon Parkway to a depth of 100 feet between 

Northern Boulevard and Morenci Lane then follows the center line of Morenci Lane south to the 

expressway.  The area to the east is now zoned R1-2.   

The Commission notes the great variety of building sizes, house styles, building and perimeter wall height 

and lot coverage of the existing structures in the Little Neck Hills area and acknowledges that a number of 

buildings east of Marathon Parkway have been enlarged using the existing R2 and R1-2 regulations.   

Based on testimony at its hearing, that homeowners in the area east of Marathon Parkway want to have 

the ability to expand their homes, the Commission, therefore, is modifying the application to retain the 

existing R2 zoning east of Marathon Parkway and to change the proposed zoning designation from R2A 

to R2 on the remaining lots in this area. The Commission notes that the rezoning from R1-2 to R2 brings 

the existing dwellings more into compliance with lot size and lot area regulations.  The R2 district would 

also lessen any possible constraints to enlarging the existing homes in this area. 

The Commission is also modifying the application by retaining the existing R3-1 zoning on six properties 
on the west side of Little Neck Parkway, south of 40th Avenue, originally proposed to be rezoned R2A.  

Although this small area is developed with one- and two-family detached, ranch style homes,  the 

Commission notes the development along Little Neck Parkway are predominantly multifamily structures. 

The properties are adjacent to multifamily, row house buildings and across from six three-family row 

houses and a multi-building apartment complex.   

Finally, the Commission is modifying the proposed reduction of the C2-2 commercial overlay district on 
Northern Boulevard and 249th Street.  The overlay would now be 125 feet in depth instead of the 

proposed 100 feet.  This would allow the entire existing commercial development to be considered within 

a commercial district. 

18                                                                                                                                            C 060562 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
  
The Commission believes that the proposed commercial overlay changes, as modified, will better reflect 

the existing commercial development and will prevent the expansion of commercial uses into the 

residential side streets. 

RESOLUTION 

