 

On February 8, 2006 (Calendar No. 9), the City Planning Commission scheduled February 22, 

2006, for a public hearing on this application (C 060259 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on 

February 22, 2006 (Calendar No. 35).  There were ten speakers in favor of the application and 

two speakers in opposition. 

The  speakers  in  favor  of  the  proposal  included  local  home  owners  and  representatives  of  the 

Bayswater  Civic  and  Far  Rockaway  Neighborhood  associations.    In  general,  the  speakers 

addressed the need to curb overdevelopment and prevent the increasing demolition of sound one- 

and two-family detached homes in their community.    

The chairman of the Bayswater Civic Association discussed the traffic and sewer problems that 

have resulted due to the new construction in the area.  She added that the local property owners 

are  not  against  all  development  in  the  neighborhood,  but  that  new  development  should  be  in 

context  with  the  existing  residences.    Another  member  of  the  Bayswater  Civic  Association 

explained  how  the  area  had  accepted  undesirable  projects  in  the  past  such  as  the  Long  Island 

Power  Authority  facility,  but  that  the  scale  of  the  current  overdevelopment  was  destroying  the 

character of the neighborhood. 

The President of the Far Rockaway Neighborhood Association and several other property owners 

spoke of the impacts on community resources and the reliability of evacuation routes in the event 

of a major storm due to increased density in the area.     

The current owner of 13-50 Norton Drive and her niece testified in opposition to the rezoning of 

their lot from the existing R2 zone to the proposed R1-2 district.  They claimed that the house on 

the site is in disrepair and will be demolished regardless of the zoning change.  They contended 

that the zoning change will reduce the value of the property that they are currently attempting to 

11 

  C 060259 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
sell, and that the R1-2 line unfairly projects out to include their lot.  They requested an alteration 

of the perimeter of the R1-2 boundary to remove their lot from the rezoning proposal. 

There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed. 

WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION PROGRAM CONSISTENCY REVIEW  

This  application  was  reviewed  by  the  Department  of  City  Planning  for  consistency  with  the 

policies of the New York City Waterfront Revitalization Program (WRP), as amended, approved 

by the New York City Council on October 13, 1999 and by the New York State Department of 

State on May 28, 2002, pursuant to The New York State Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal 

Resources  Act  of  1981  (New  York  State  Executive  Law,  Section  910  et  seq.).  The  designated 

WRP number is 05-092.   

This action was determined to be consistent with the New York City Waterfront Revitalization 

Program. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate. 

The  Commission  believes  that  this  action  represents  a  comprehensive  zoning  strategy  for  the 

neighborhoods of Bayswater and Far Rockaway.  The Commission believe that the rezoning will 

aid  in  the  preservation  of  the  area’s  predominant  low-density  character  and  ensure  that  future 

residential development will be more consistent with surrounding neighborhood contexts. 

The Commission notes that the existing, general residence districts of R3-2, R4 and R5 found in 

the rezoning area allow housing types and densities inconsistent with the existing character of the 

neighborhoods.    The  Commission  believes  that  the  proposed  lower-density  and  contextual 

districts  of  R3A,  R3X,  R4A,  and  R4-1  would  produce  development  that  better  fits  within  the 

existing built environment of the area. 

In  addition,  the  Commission  believes  that  the  proposed  R1-2  district  will  address  the  over-

development in the Bayswater area due to excessive subdivision by increasing the minimum lot 

12 

 C 060259 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
size and width required for all new developments.  It is expected that this change would produce 

development that will better reflect the character of those areas. 

Regarding the testimony of the property owner at 1350 Norton Drive (block 15697, lot 24), the 

Commission  notes  that  the  property  could  still  be  subdivided  under  the  proposed  R1-2 

designation and that development to be expected under the proposal would be consistent with the 

existing built character immediately to the east and throughout much of the surrounding area. 

RESOLUTION 

