 

On December 7, 2005 (Calendar No. 6), the City Planning Commission scheduled December 21, 2005, for a 

public hearing on this application (C 060153 ZMQ).  On December 21, 2005 (Calendar No. 36) the hearing 

14 

C 060153 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
was continued to January 11, 2006 (Calendar No. 34).  There were two speakers in favor of the application 

and two speakers in opposition. 

A representative for the Council Member of Council District 30 read a statement from the Council Member 

stating his general support to the rezoning proposal, but stated his opposition to the proposed R6B district on 

Metropolitan Avenue and the retention of the existing R5 district in the South Middle Village area bounded 

by Metropolitan Avenue, Cooper Avenue, 80th Street and 73rd Place.  The Council Member requested a 

follow-up rezoning application be filed to propose lower-density and contextual zoning districts in these two 

areas. 

The district manager of Community Board 5 reiterated the community board’s conditions for the approval of 

the  rezoning  application  and  also  stated  that  a  separate,  follow-up  rezoning  application  be  submitted  to 

address the retained R5 zone in the South Middle Village area. 

The owner of a property at 81-01 Myrtle Avenue testified that his property lies within the proposed R5B 

district on Myrtle Avenue.  He stated that the unusual shape of his lot and its 145-foot depth would cause him 

hardship in developing the site as the R5B zoning district and C1-3 commercial overlay are proposed to 

extend 100 feet over the depth of the lot, producing a lot split by an R5B/C1-3 zone and an R4-1 zone. 

A representative for the owner of the property at 81-01 Myrtle Avenue explained that access to the site is 

limited within the first 100 feet because of an existing bus stop located on 81st Street, the western boundary of 

the site.  He explained that if the R5B/C1-3 zone was extended, access to the lot could be more efficiently laid 

out, giving more parking spaces. 

There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map as modified herein is appropriate. 

15 

C 060153 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Commission believes that this action represents a comprehensive zoning strategy for the neighborhoods 

of Middle Village and Glendale and will help to preserve the area’s predominant low-density character and 

ensure that future residential development will be more consistent with surrounding neighborhood contexts. 

The Commission notes that the existing, general residence districts of R3-2, R4 and R5 found in the rezoning 

area  produce  housing  types  and  densities  not  within  the  existing  character  of  the  neighborhoods.    The 

Commission believes that the proposed lower-density and contextual districts of R3X, R4-1, R4A, R4B and 

R5B would produce development that better fits within the existing built environment of the area. 

In addition, the Commission believes that the proposed commercial overlay changes better reflect existing 

commercial development and will keep commercial uses from encroaching on midblock residential uses. 

The Commission acknowledges the several requests of Community Board 5, but notes that these are for the 

most part beyond the scope of the application.  The request that the R6B zoning district proposed for a portion 

of  Metropolitan  Avenue  be  changed  to  lower-density  R5B  and  R4-1  zones,  is  beyond  scope,  but  the 

Commission agrees that the proposed R6B is not appropriate for the area because it will produce buildings 

with a density that will not be consistent with the area’s existing built environment.  Consequently, the 

Commission is modifying this application to leave this portion of Metropolitan Avenue between 69th Street 

and 73rd Place zoned R5. The Commission notes that the Department will further study this area to address the 

board’s concerns. 

The Commission also recognizes the request of the community board and the Queens Borough President to 

re-evaluate the retention of the R5 zoning district in the South Middle Village area bounded by Metropolitan 

Avenue, 80th Street, Cooper Avenue and 73rd Place.  The Department will also study this area to determine the 

appropriate zoning. 

Regarding the testimony of the property owner at 81-01 Myrtle Avenue, the Commission notes that the 

boundary of the proposed R5B district with a C1-3 commercial overlay is placed at a depth of 100 feet north 

of Myrtle Avenue, and that the property is unusually shaped, with a depth of 144 feet at its deepest point.  

16 

C 060153 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
  
 
Given the property covers the entire blockfront of Myrtle Avenue between 81st and 82nd streets, and the 

unusual depth of the property compared to other properties fronting Myrtle Avenue in the proposed R5B 

district, the Commission is modifying this application to increase the depth of the proposed R5B zoning 

district and C1-3 commercial overlay from 100 feet to 125 feet between 81st and 82nd streets. 

RESOLUTION 
