 

On February 8, 2006 (Calendar No. 10), the City Planning Commission scheduled February 

22, 2006, for a public hearing on this application (C 060235 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly 

held  on  February  22,  2006  (Calendar  No.  36).    There  were  five  speakers  in  favor  of  the 

application, and none in opposition. 

Three  residents  of  Fresh  Meadows,  the  president  of  the  Fresh  Meadows  Homeowners 

Association  and  the  president  of  the  West  Cunningham  Park  Civic  Association  spoke  in 

favor of the proposal. The two civic association presidents described their efforts to inform 

the affected property owners of the proposed zoning.  One of the residents spoke in support 

of the proposal, stating that the proposed R2A zoning district would allow minor expansion 

of  existing  homes,  but  prohibit  buildings  that  were  out  of  character  with  the  existing 

neighborhood. One resident described the need for an amendment to the existing zoning and 

the negative effects that new out-of-character development was having on their community. 

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate. 

The  Commission  believes  that  this  rezoning  action  represents  a  comprehensive  zoning 

strategy  for  the  Fresh  Meadows,  Utopia  Estates  and  West  Cunningham  Park  areas  of 

Community  District  8  and  will  prevent  overscaled  housing  developments  that  are  out-of-

character with traditional development patterns.  

5 

C 060235 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
The  Commission  believes  that  the  proposed  R2A  district  would  ensure  that  future 

development or expansion of existing homes would be within an envelope that better reflects 

the  area’s  existing  context.    The  action  would  be  consistent  with  the  land  use  in  the  area, 

maintaining  its  prevailing  character  without  precluding  future  residential  development 

opportunities.   

RESOLUTION 

