 

On March 22, 2006 (Calendar No. 6), the City Planning Commission scheduled April 5, 2006 (Calendar No. 

21), for a public hearing on this application (C 060294 ZMQ).  There were four speakers in favor of the 

application and none in opposition. 

The district manager of Community Board 5 reiterated the community board’s conditions for the approval of 

the rezoning application.  In particular, the district manager stressed the board’s objections to the higher 

density  R7X  zoning  district  proposed  for  Queens  Boulevard  and  identified  the  locations  for  which 

Community Board 5 urged in their resolution further consideration for contextual and lower density zoning 

districts. 

A representative for the Council Member of Council District 26 read a statement from the Council Member 

stating his support for the rezoning proposal.  The statement also addressed the Council Member’s concerns 

regarding the creation of opportunities for middle income housing and home ownership within the Queens 

Boulevard corridor while providing for the infrastructure – particularly school capacity – to support the area’s 

growth. 

The  director  of  the  Pratt  Center  for  Community  Development  presented  testimony  about  the  need  for 

affordable housing throughout Queens and the city.  The speaker further recommended an amendment to the 

rezoning proposal to establish an Inclusionary Housing program applicable to the Queens Boulevard corridor. 

The Deputy Executive Director of Asian Americans for Equality (AAFE) reiterated the need for affordable 

housing in the area and throughout the city.  In stating AAFE’s involvement in advocating the production of 

housing for low- and moderate-income residents, the speaker urged the inclusion of an affordable housing 

component in the proposed rezoning. 

There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed. 

16 

C 060294 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate. 

The  Commission  considers  this  action  to  be  representative  of  a  comprehensive  zoning  strategy  for  the 

neighborhoods of Maspeth and Woodside.  Most notably, the Commission believes that the rezoning will help 

to preserve and reinforce the predominant lower-density character of the neighborhoods’ residential blocks 

and  ensure  that  future  residential  development  will  be  more  consistent  with  surrounding  neighborhood 

contexts. 

The Commission notes that the existing residence districts of R4, R5 and R5B found in the rezoning area 

produce housing types and densities not within the existing character of the respective neighborhood blocks.  

The Commission believes that the proposed lower-density and contextual districts of R4-1 and R4B would 

create  development  that  better  fits  within  the  existing  built  environment  of  the  area.    Likewise,  the 

Commission believes that the changes from existing R6 and R6B general residence districts to R5 and R5B 

respectively would preserve and reinforce the established neighborhood fabric of the respective blocks and 

further prevent out-of-character development.   

Furthermore, the Commission believes the proposed action is a balanced zoning plan that addresses the need 

for new housing opportunities while preserving and fortifying neighborhood character.  In particular, the 

Commission believes that extending the existing R7X zoning district on Queens Boulevard generally west of 
57th Street and east of 63rd Street would foster opportunities for new housing in buildings of a scale and 

density appropriate for this wide thoroughfare.  Additionally, the Commission believes that concomitant 

changes at the Queens Boulevard/Roosevelt Avenue junction from C8-1 and M1-1 to R6 would further 

encourage appropriate new residential development. 

The Commission acknowledges the recommendations of Community Board 2, Community Board 5 and the 

Borough Board with regard to the R4 Infill provisions.  The Commission notes that changes in the infill 

regulations are outside the scope of this application and while use of the R4 Infill provisions may result in 

out-of-character development in Maspeth and Woodside, they are effectively supporting housing production 

in other parts of the city.  The Commission further notes that this rezoning will make the R4 Infill provisions 

17 

C 060294 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
inapplicable in most of the areas of Maspeth and Woodside to be rezoned. 

The Commission also acknowledges the specific requests of Community Board 5 for further zoning changes.  

Nevertheless,  the  Commission  believes  that  the  zoning  changes  requested  by  the  board  would  not  be 

appropriate for the existing mix of building types and densities characterizing those areas identified by the 

board and that such changes are beyond the scope of this application. 

Furthermore, the Commission recognizes the stipulations and concerns of Community Board 2, the Borough 

Board and the Council Member for City Council District 26 (CD26) regarding infrastructure and services in 

the area.  In response, the Commission notes that the Department of City Planning will monitor the impacts of 

the rezoning on area-wide infrastructure and services and continue to provide information and assistance to 

the community board and elected officials in efforts to improve the overall infrastructure and services in the 

area. 

Affordable  housing  was  the  subject  of  extensive  discussion  during  the  public  review  process.    In  their 

testimonies, representatives of the Council Member for CD26, the Pratt Center for Community Development 

and AAFE, described the high priority they place on the provision of affordable housing in new developments 

on  Queens  Boulevard  in  CD2.    The  Commission  concurs  that  the inclusion of affordable housing is an 

important element in creating and maintaining an economically diverse community in Woodside. 

Accordingly, the Commission recently referred for public review a zoning text amendment application (N 

060504 ZRQ) from the Department of City Planning that would make the Inclusionary Housing program 

applicable to the R7X districts proposed to be mapped on Queens Boulevard between 50th and 57th streets, 

on  the  north  side  of  Queens  Boulevard  between  64th  and  73rd  streets  and  on  the  south  side  of Queens 

Boulevard between 61st and 73rd streets in CD2.   

18 

C 060294 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESOLUTION 

