  

On April 26, 2006 (Calendar No. 3) the City Planning Commission scheduled May 10, 2006 for a 

public hearing on this application (C 060337 ZMQ). The hearing was duly held on May 10, 2006 

(Calendar No. 28). There were two speakers in favor of the applications and six speakers in favor 

of the applications with modifications.  

A resident of Jamaica Hill  spoke in favor of the application, stating that his community was 

experiencing dramatic changes that impacted the character of the community. A property owner 

18 

C 060337 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in Hillcrest spoke in favor of the application, stating that the proposed R5D would provide an 

opportunity for higher quality development on his property with a more predicable bulk that 

better addresses the streetscape. 

Six residents of Hillcrest and the adjacent neighborhood of Parkway Village spoke in support of 

the application, but requested the removal of the proposed R5D from 164th Street, Union 

Turnpike and Parsons Boulevard north of the Grand Central Parkway. The residents were 

concerned that their community is adjacent to several large institutions and several nearby sites 

that have been proposed for significant development, and that any new development under the 

proposed R5D rezoning in this action would create additional congestion and limit already 

inadequate public services. 

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed.  

CONSIDERATION  

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map, in conjunction with the 

amendments to the Zoning Resolution, as modified herein, is appropriate.  

The Commission believes that this action represents a comprehensive zoning strategy for the 

neighborhoods of Jamaica Hill and Hillcrest and will help to preserve the area’s predominant 

lower-density character and ensure that future residential development will be more consistent 

with surrounding neighborhood contexts. 

The Commission notes that the existing R2, R3-2, R4 and R5 districts found in the rezoning area 

permit housing that is not within the existing character of the neighborhoods.  The Commission 

19 

C 060337 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
believes that the proposed lower-density and contextual districts of R2, R2A, R3A, R4-1, R4A 

and R4B would produce development that better fits within the existing character of the area. 

In addition to rezoning to lower-density and contextual zoning districts, the Commission believes 

that a new contextual district is also needed that allows for moderate-density multifamily housing 

in appropriate locations. The Commission believes the creation of the new R5D zoning district 

provides a better moderate density development pattern in areas with high automotive 

dependency. It would recognize the particular height and bulk characteristics of these areas by 

imposing height limitations, require a significant amount of accessory parking and require street 

tree and front yard planting. The Commission believes that the R5D would provide new housing 

opportunities while recognizing the character of the surrounding lower density areas.  

The proposed R5D district on Union Turnpike and Parsons Boulevard, wide streets that are 

served by transit, will facilitate residential development. The Commission believes that new 

development under the proposed zoning will help establish Union Turnpike and reinforce Parsons 

Boulevard as active residential-commercial corridors.  

The Commission carefully considered the testimony at its public hearing regarding the areas 

where the R5D district is proposed, and consequently is modifying the application to retain R4 

zoning along 164th Street from 82nd Road to 81st Avenue and modifies the proposed R5D to R4 on 

the portion of 164th Street between 81st Avenue up to a line 100 feet south of Union Turnpike.  

The Commission believes that the R4 zoning appropriately reflects existing patterns of 

development along this portion of 164th Street as well as sets reasonable parameters for future 

development.  The Commission believes the R5D district is the appropriate zoning designation 

20 

C 060337 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
for frontages of Union Turnpike and Parsons Boulevard, which are the primary thoroughfares in 

the rezoning area.  

Finally, the Commission believes that the proposed commercial overlay changes better reflect 

existing commercial development, and will prevent the expansion of potentially incompatible 

commercial uses onto residential side streets.  

RESOLUTION  

