 

On November 15, 2006 (Cal. No. 7), the Commission scheduled December 6, 2006 for a public hearing.  On 

December 6, 2006 (Calendar No. 14), the City Planning Commission held a public hearing on this application 

(C 070119 ZMQ).  There were 6 speakers in favor of the application and 59 speakers in opposition.   

Persons speaking in support included the Vice-Chair and Land Use Committee Chair for Community Board 7, 

the president of the Queensboro Hill Neighborhood Association, the incoming president of the Queensboro 

Hill Neighborhood Association, a private planning consultant, and two area residents.   

The Vice-Chair and Land Use Committee Chair for Community Board 7 testified that the proposed rezoning 

was essential to prevent out-of-character developments and preserve the neighborhood’s quality of life.  He 

noted that the Community Board had advertised all public meetings regarding the rezoning in 23 separate 

newspapers, including Spanish, Korean, and Chinese-language papers. 

The  current  president  of  the  Queensboro  Hill  Neighborhood  Association  explained  that  the  association 

included over 200 homeowners and had been actively pursuing a contextual rezoning for over ten years.  She 

noted the area is predominantly developed with one- and two-family homes, and that recent developments 

encouraged  by  the  current  R4  zoning  threaten  the  neighborhood’s  character  and  overload  community 

infrastructure.   

The private planning consultant testified in support of the rezoning, noting that it would prevent dramatic 

changes to the community’s character and help ensure that new housing would better fit in with neighboring 

homes.  He also noted that the public review process had been completely open, and that very little opposition 

was voiced at the Community Board and Borough President public hearings. 

There were 59 speakers in opposition, mostly residents of the proposed R2A and R3X areas in portions of 

Queensboro Hill.  Speakers were opposed to the single-family and reduced floor area restrictions of the R2A 
zoning proposed in two locations: an area between 56th Road to 59th Avenue, from 141st and 148th streets, and 
an area bounded by Booth Memorial Avenue, 156th Street, 59th Avenue, and 160th Street.  These speakers 

stated that they wanted the flexibility to adapt their property to changing family needs, particularly the ability 

to have two-family occupancy.  

17 

C 070119 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Other speakers opposed the R3X zoning proposed for three locations: an area between 58th and 59th avenues, 
from 142nd to 146th streets; two blockfronts along 59th Avenue between 148th and 150th streets; and an area 
between 58th Road and the service road of the Horace Harding Expressway from 100 feet west of 153rd Street 

to 100 feet west of Kissena Boulevard.  The speakers noted that the R3X zone would allow two-family 

occupancy, but objected to the reduced floor area ratio (from 0.9 to 0.6) as surrounding blocks would retain 

the higher FAR. 

Many speakers in opposition also claimed that they had never been informed about the proposed rezoning nor 

notified of any meetings regarding it.  

A representative of a development company testified in opposition to the proposed reduction in depth of the 
existing C1-2 commercial overlay on the southeast corner of Booth Memorial Avenue and 136th Street.  The 

speaker noted that the Department had proposed the reduced overlay depth in order to remove commercial 

zoning from residentially-developed lots, but the development company had since purchased these lots and 

razed the houses in order to construct a medical community facility with commercial use in the cellar, which 

could not be built if the proposed zoning change were approved. 

There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed.     

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map, as modified herein, is appropriate. 

The Commission believes that this rezoning action is a comprehensive zoning strategy for the neighborhoods 

of Queensboro Hill, Cedar Grove, Kissena Heights and Flushing-on-the-Hill, and will help preserve the area’s 

predominant low-density character; encourage future development that reflects and reinforces the area’s 

established building patterns; and prevent encroachment of commercial development into residential areas. 

The Commission notes that floor area exemptions and the sky exposure plane regulations applicable to the 

existing  R2  single-family  district  in  Cedar  Grove  allows  new  homes  that  would  be  out-of-scale  with 

neighboring buildings.  The Commission further notes that the existing R3-2 and R4 general residence zoning 

allows housing types and densities that are out-of-character with the established context in the areas proposed 

to be rezoned.  The Commission believes that changing the existing R2, R3-2 and R4 districts to a mix of 

18 

C 070119 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
lower-density and contextual districts that include R2A, R3A, R3X, R3-1, R4B, R4-1, R4 and R5B would 

preserve the predominant one- and two-family context of these areas in Queensboro Hill and surrounding 

neighborhoods, as well as produce development more consistent with established building patterns in the 

rezoning area. 

The  Commission  acknowledges  the  concerns  expressed  by  community  residents  who  appeared  at  the 

Commission’s public hearing regarding the proposed zoning changes from an R4 district to an R2A single-

family district in two locations and from an R4 to an R3X district in three locations.  The Commission 

carefully evaluated   the context of these areas and noted the predominance of detached, primarily two-story 

homes  in  these  areas,  as  well  as  the  detrimental  impact  to  the  built  fabric  that  recent  out-of-character 

development has had on the area.  In order to best balance the wishes of homeowners to have flexibility to 

have  two-family  occupancy  and  adapted  their  detached  homes  to future family needs, the Commission, 
therefore, is modifying the application to change proposed R2A zoning in two locations (an area between 56th 
Road to 59th Avenue, from 141st and 148th streets, and an area bounded by Booth Memorial Avenue, 156th 
Street, 59th Avenue, and 160th Street) and R3X zoning in three locations (an area between 58th and 59th 
avenues, from 142nd to 146th streets; two blockfronts along 59th Avenue between 148th and 150th streets; and 
an area between 58th Road and the service road of the Horace Harding Expressway from 100 feet west of 
153rd Street to 100 feet west of Kissena Boulevard) to R4A districts. 

The Commission notes that in modifying the application, the R4A district will provide a maximum floor area 

ratio  of  0.9  (including  attic  allowance)  as  permitted  in  the  current  R4  district,  but  it  will  limited  future 

development  to  detached,  one-  and  two-family  residences.    The  Commission  further  notes  that  in  R4A 

districts, the same 21-foot perimeter wall height, 35-foot building height and front yard line-up provisions 

will still be applicable.  The Commission believes these regulations are important aspects of the R4A district 

to protect the character of the blocks where it is now proposed. 

The  Commission is also modifying the application to retain the existing depth of 210 feet for the C1-2 
commercial overlay on the southeast corner of Booth Memorial Avenue and 136th Street.  The Commission 

notes that the rationale for a reduced depth no longer exists because the former residential buildings have been 

leveled, and the proposed primarily community facility building is appropriate in this location.     

The Commission believes the remaining proposed commercial overlay changes, as modified, will better 

19 

C 070119 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
reflect existing commercial development patterns and will prevent the expansion of commercial uses onto 

residential side streets. 

RESOLUTION 

