 

On May 9, 2007 (Calendar No. 7), the City Planning Commission scheduled May 23, 2007, for a 

public hearing on the original application (C 070314 ZMQ) and the modified application (C 

070314 (A) ZMQ) and related actions (C 070158 MMQ, N 070315 ZRQ, N 070315 (A) ZRQ, C 

070316 HUQ, N 070317 HGQ, C 070322 HDQ and C 0070318 PPQ).  The hearing was duly 

held on May 23, 2007 (Calendar No. 29), in conjunction with the applications for the related 

actions. 

There were 31 speakers in favor of the application and related actions and 16 speakers in 

opposition.    

Those who spoke in support included representatives of the Greater Jamaica Development 
Corporation; the Regional Plan Association; the City Council Member from the 24th district; the 

Pratt Center for Community Development; the Real Estate Board of New York; the NY Metro 

Chapter of the American Planning Association; other institutions, businesses and community 

groups;  and the Chair of Community Board 12; the  Borough President; the City Council 
Member from the  27th District; and residents of the area.   

 65 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Those who spoke in opposition included local residents; local business owners; a representative 
of the State Senator from the 11th District; and representatives of other local community groups 

including the Jamaica Residents for an Alternate Plan (members of Community Board 12’s 

former AD HOC Committee), the A&L Multi-Block Civic Association, the Hillcrest Estates 

Civic Association and the Queens Civic Congress.  Several members of Community Board 12’s 

former AD HOC Committee, a committee that was formed by CB 12 to review the proposed 

Plan and make recommendations to the board, spoke in opposition to parts of the proposal.   

The speakers in favor applauded the proposed changes in Downtown Jamaica, citing the need for 

revitalization and new investment in the area.    Several representatives and property owners 

described the foreseeable benefits of the rezoning as facilitating much-needed new housing 

development and business and employment opportunities in the Jamaica core and along Hillside 

Avenue.     Several speakers with property interests in the rezoning area described constraints on 

key development sites near the AirTrain and adjacent to the LIRR embankment, and requested 

further modification to the zoning text relating to rear yard and height requirements to facilitate 

development on these properties.   

The  owner of  property located at Archer Avenue and Sutphin Boulevard spoke in support of the 

overall Plan but objected to the proposed zoning change from C4-6 to C6-2 on his property 

claiming it was a downzoning, resulting in lower  residential and community facility FARs.      

The Borough President described the need to improve the image of Hillside Avenue that would 

include more street trees and more attractive store fronts.  She recommended a working group be 

formed, composed of the affected parties and design professionals to study Hillside Avenue.  She 

also recommended better coordination of city agency efforts to oversee capital projects and 

enhancements to support growth. 

 66 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Many speakers, including the Borough President, addressed the issue of affordable housing.  

While agreeing that Inclusionary Zoning is a key component of the Plan, several speakers 

requested modifications to the Inclusionary Housing Program.  These included making provision 

of affordable units mandatory in areas zoned R6A and higher, that these units be provided only 

on-site and that the City should to revisit the definition of affordable.    

Several speakers described the need to provide economic opportunities to the local population.  

One speaker urged that first source hiring be required to maximize employment opportunities for 

the residents from the immediate neighborhood by zip code.  A representative for a local 

economic organization sought support for a local benefits program that would encourage local 

investment, involve local developers and ensure minority participation.  Another speaker called 

on EDC and SBS to develop new strategies for hiring people from the local areas, ensuring a 

living wage and providing opportunities for local businesses. 

Most of the speakers who testified in opposition were concerned with the potential impacts that 

the rezoning would have on the area’s infrastructure and services, including traffic, 

transportation, parking, school seats, health, safety and enforcement.  They expressed special 

concern about the proposed R7A and R7X districts along Hillside Avenue. Most of these 

speakers supported alternate plans developed by Community Board 12’s former AD HOC 
Committee and another plan proposed by the Council Member from the 24th District, both of 

which recommended reduced densities along Hillside Avenue.    

The owner of a cement plant located one block east of the AirTrain Station at 95th Avenue and 
147th Place, testified in opposition to the Plan because the proposed zoning on his property from 

M1-1 to R5 would render the current use non-conforming.  He stated that his company had 70 

employees mostly from the local area.  He further stated that any future financing or expansion 

would become difficult if his business became a nonconforming use.   He requested that the 

existing M1-1 zoning district remain on his property.   

 67 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A few speakers who opposed the rezoning felt that the proposal did not go far enough in 

protecting 1- and 2- family neighborhoods from overdevelopment.  They opposed the proposed 

change from M1-1 to M1-2 on properties located at the eastern portion of the zoning area along 

the railroad tracks if open uses, such as waste transfer stations, were allowed with this zone, and 

recommended increasing the required open area from 8 feet to 12 feet in the proposed “building 

transition rule” to better protect residential properties abutting potential development sites along 

the area’s wide streets.    

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed.   

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this proposed modified amendment of the Zoning Map (C 070314 

(A) ZMQ), as further modified herein, in conjunction with the related applications for modified 

amendments to the Zoning Resolution ( N 070315 (A) ZRQ) as further amended herein,  an 

amendment to the City Map (C 070158 MMQ), approval of the Jamaica Gateway Urban 

Renewal Plan (C 070316 HUQ), designation of the Jamaica Gateway Urban Renewal Plan (N 

070317 HGQ), the disposition of real property within the Jamaica Gateway Urban Renewal Plan 

(C 070322 HDQ), and the disposition of one city-owned property (C 070318 PPQ) are 

appropriate. 

The Commission is pleased to support this comprehensive, long range strategy to support 

Jamaica’s downtown business district, expand housing and economic opportunities along the 

area’s major thoroughfares and preserve the character of neighboring low-rise residential 

communities.   The Plan builds on the existing strengths of this unique transit-oriented regional 

center, and it will set the stage for 3 million square feet of new commercial space, more than 

3,400 dwelling units and about 9,600 jobs to be created by 2015.  At the same time, the Plan 

proposes finely-tuned zoning designed to preserve areas with one- and two- family homes and 

other low-rise contexts.   

 68 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ZONING MAP AMENDMENT 

The Commission recognizes that zoning in the 368-block rezoning area has not changed 

substantially in over 45 years when Jamaica was a major retail and business center, with large 

department stores along Jamaica Avenue and light manufacturing and warehouse activities 

clustered near the Long Island Rail Road.   The originally proposed actions represent a 

significant upgrade in the area’s zoning, utilizing the most up-to-date zoning practices to provide 

for orderly growth.   

The Commission notes that the proposed zoning changes will protect approximately 130 

residential blocks from out of scale development.  These blocks are characterized by 1- and 2- 

family homes where current zoning allows all types of residential buildings, including multi-

family development.  The proposed R3A, R3X and R4-1 zoning districts will limit new 

residential construction to 1- and 2- family residences and protect these areas from out-of-

character development.  The Commission also notes that the proposed zoning changes to R4 and 

R5 will better match the low-rise mixed residential character on 50 blocks most of which are 

currently zoned for medium density residential development. 

The Commission believes that the zoning changes proposed for the downtown area -- C6-4, C6-

3, C6-2, C4-5X, and C4-4A -- will provide for a mix of residential, community facility and 

commercial uses at densities that are appropriate for this regional center.   The Commission 

further notes that the proposed zones provide a range of higher densities in the downtown area, 

that permit the largest buildings nearest the transit hubs with a gradual stepping down in scale on 

blocks further from the hubs to provide for a better transition with adjacent residential 

communities.   

The Commission believes that the medium density contextual districts proposed to be mapped in 

the Downtown area (R7A) and at the Downtown’s eastern edge (R6A) will better reflect the 

 69 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
existing mid-rise contexts and provide height limits and more predictable building envelopes for 

future development.   The Commission believes that the R7X district proposed along the central 

and western portion of Hillside Avenue represents an important opportunity to revitalize this 

corridor with new housing and mixed-use buildings convenient to the transit stations located 

along the avenue.  The Commission also notes that R6 and C4-2 zoning districts currently 
mapped along Hillside Avenue generally from Parsons Boulevard to 181st Street on the south 

side of the avenue allow densities of up to 4.8 FAR that would be similar to the proposed R7X 

district, but without the height limits of the R7X zone or incentives for affordable housing.   The 

Commission also notes that the Borough President, recommended that a team of design 

consultants be hired by the City to work with local stakeholders, civic associations, elected 

officials and city agencies to study and make recommendations for streetscape improvements 

along the Hillside Avenue corridor.   The Commission believes that such enhancements to the 

physical character would be appropriate to correspond to the proposed rezoning for the corridor 

and set the stage for much-needed additional development  

The Commission believes that other proposed medium density zones along corridors leading to 

Downtown Jamaica generally reflect the various scales of development along these streets such 

as the R6A zoning proposed for portions of Jamaica Avenue, Sutphin Boulevard, Merrick 

Boulevard and Liberty Avenue and the R5D zoning proposed for Guy R. Brewer Boulevard and 

the southern portion of Sutphin Boulevard.  The Commission believes these zones will generally 

promote new development that reinforces and enhances the qualities of these corridors.    

The Commission, however, acknowledges recommendations by the Borough President, civic 

groups and residents for changes to the proposed zoning along Hillside Avenue, as well as 

recommendations and testimony for changes to the zoning along Jamaica Avenue, Liberty 

Avenue and Merrick Boulevard in order to reduce the scale and density of future development.  

The Commission carefully considered such recommended changes and believes that certain 

adjustments along Hillside Avenue, Jamaica Avenue, Liberty Avenue and Merrick Boulevard 

would address these concerns while still achieving important objectives for development, and the 

 70 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
Commission is, therefore, adopting the following modifications to the modified zoning map 

amendment:  

•  On Hillside Avenue, east of Midland Parkway/181st Street to 191st Street - replace 

the proposed R7A district with an R6A district; 

The Commission believes the R6A district would provide an improved transition in density 

and scale at the eastern end of the Hillside Avenue corridor where it is adjacent to areas 

developed primarily with one- and two-family houses.  The R6A would still allow new 

apartment buildings that would reinforce the existing context of 6- to 7-story multifamily 

buildings found in this portion of the avenue.  The R6A zone would have a maximum FAR 

of 3.0 and a maximum building height of 70 feet.  The Inclusionary Housing Program 

would not be available in this zone. 

•  On Hillside Avenue, west of Midland Parkway/181st Street to 175th Street and 

Edgerton Boulevard - replace the proposed R7X district with an R7A district; 

The Commission believes the R7A district would also provide an improved transition in 

density and scale along this portion of Hillside Avenue where it is adjacent to areas 

developed primarily with one- and two-family houses.  The R7A would still allow new 

apartment buildings that would reinforce the existing context of 7- to 8-story multifamily 

buildings found along this portion of the avenue.  The R7A district would have a base FAR 

of 3.45 with a maximum FAR of 4.6 with the inclusionary housing bonus and a maximum 

building height of 80 feet.   A total of 207 affordable housing units are projected to be 

generated through the redevelopment of sites on Hillside under this further modified 

rezoning, compared to 308 units under the original modified rezoning. 

•  On Jamaica Avenue, east of 181st Street - replace the proposed R6A district with 

an R5D district; 

The Commission believes the R5D district would provide an improved transition at the 

eastern end of Jamaica Avenue which is developed primarily with one- and two- story 

commercial and mixed-use buildings.  The R5D zone would have a maximum FAR of 2.0 

and a maximum building height of 40 feet. 

 71 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
•  On Liberty Avenue, east of 168th Place - replace the proposed R6A district with an 

R5B district; 

The Commission believes the R5B district would provide an improved transition at the 

eastern end of Liberty Avenue which is developed primarily with one- and two-story 

residential and mixed-use buildings.  The R5B district would have a maximum FAR of 1.35 

and a maximum building height of 33 feet. 

•  Along Merrick Boulevard between Liberty Avenue and 109th Avenue - replace the 

proposed R6A district with an R5D district. 

The Commission believes the R5D district with its maximum FAR of 2.0 would provide an 

improved transition in the section of the boulevard adjacent to residential lots developed 
with one- and two-family houses.  The portion of the boulevard south of 109th Avenue 

would retain the proposed R6A zoning as it is more consistent with the existing 7-story 

apartment buildings. 

ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT 

The Commission believes that the creation of the proposed Special Downtown Jamaica District 

will complement the proposed zoning map changes by providing urban design controls that will 

further enhance the pedestrian environment and improve the quality of life for those who live, 

work and visit Downtown Jamaica.   The Commission notes that the proposed text utilizes 

innovative strategies to achieve the goals of the Jamaica Plan, especially to regulate the scale of 

base portions of buildings in the downtown and provide for the transition in scales between 

apartment buildings on corridors and adjacent lower density development. 

Inclusionary Housing 

The Commission is pleased that the Plan builds upon the City’s commitment to provide 

affordable housing throughout New York City.  It is projected that 792 units could be produced 

in Jamaica through the proposed affordable housing program, which was analyzed as the 

Affordable Housing Alternative in the FEIS.  This Inclusionary Housing Program (IHP) would 

 72 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
couple a zoning bonus with housing subsidy programs to create powerful incentives for 

affordable housing development in the downtown area and along Hillside Avenue.  The proposal 

also creates incentives for the preservation of existing affordable units in the broader Jamaica 

community.    

The Commission notes that the IHP for Jamaica would include many of the innovations recently 

adopted in previous zoning initiatives elsewhere in the City.  For instance, affordable units that 

earn the bonus are required to remain permanently affordable, regardless of the term of 

affordability normally required by any subsidy program regulations.  Use of the preservation 

option, as well as the off-site construction option, would address the need for permanent 

affordable housing.  The Commission notes that in addition to the standard inclusionary housing 

options of providing affordable units elsewhere in the same Community District as the new 

development or in an adjacent Community District within a ½ mile radius, the special district 

would allow off-site affordable units to be located anywhere in the Special District. 

The Commission heard testimony recommending a mandatory affordable housing requirement.  

The Commission notes the City’s strong record of providing effective voluntary incentives to 

private developers to produce affordable housing, including the optional Inclusionary Housing 

Program, and that New York City continues to be in the vanguard in providing affordable 

housing.  The IHP proposed for Jamaica encompasses one of the largest areas where IHP is 

applicable in the City.   The Commission further notes the extraordinary difficulty to find 

additional opportunities for meeting the future housing needs of the City and believes that a 

voluntary Inclusionary Housing Program, coupled with additional density incentives, is the most 

appropriate way to meet these housing challenges. 

The Commission heard testimony from several speakers recommending that affordable units be 

located on-site only and that the inclusionary housing program be extended to apply in R6A 

districts.  The Commission believes the availability of both an on-site and off-site option is 

essential to the viability of the IHP.  Also, the Commission seeks to provide the strongest 

 73 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
  
 
incentives for private and non-profit developers to produce permanently affordable units and  

believes that the R6A district is too limited in allowable densities to provide the strong incentives 

needed.    

Speakers also raised other issues including: whether the IHP would be adequate to meet the 

needs of lower income people living in Jamaica today; that at least 50% of housing on urban 

renewal or publicly owned sites should be affordable and there should be a tax credit for small 

landlords; and that there be a lower range of affordable housing development through a 50-30-20 

plan.   Other speakers requested adoption of anti-harassment provisions for the rezoning area.   

The Commission believes that the proposed regulations will produce affordable housing at a 

variety of income levels, including low-income households.  The affordable units would be 

available to households making less than 80% of the Area Median Income, which is $56,720 for 

a family of four.  This level of eligibility would encompass a broad range of working families in 

the Jamaica area, where the median family income is around $40,000.  Additional HPD or HDC 

programs are available that can be used in conjunction with the inclusionary bonus to target 

families with even lower incomes.   

The Jamaica Plan’s Inclusionary Housing program would also partially mitigate the potential 

secondary displacement impact disclosed in the FEIS.  As disclosed in the FEIS, approximately 

1,835 housing units could be vulnerable to indirect displacement pressures as a consequence of 

changes in the real estate market induced by the Jamaica Plan.  The proposed inclusionary 

housing program would incentivize the preservation of existing affordable housing units and the 

production of new affordable units, for which 50% of the affordable units would be set aside for 

residents of Community District 12.   

The Commission believes that the proposed regulations establish an effective approach to 

promoting affordable housing development where city-owned land is scarce, and one that would 

work under a variety of market conditions and for different types of development.  The 

 74 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commission encourages HPD to continue to explore creative alternatives in meeting the growing 

demand for affordable housing.  

In adopting the Affordable Housing Alternative, as modified, the Commission recognizes that 

the provision for inclusionary housing only partially mitigates the significant adverse impacts to 

indirect residential displacement disclosed in the FEIS.  This alternative would also only partially 

mitigate impacts to parking and would not include mitigation for the open space, certain 

shadows, and historic resources impacts disclosed in the FEIS.   However, the Commission 

believes that these effects are outweighed by the benefits and importance of achieving the Plan’s 

goal to revitalize Downtown Jamaica and provide new affordable housing while preserving 

industrial uses, where appropriate, as well as the low-density character of Jamaica’s 

neighborhoods.  The Commission notes that with respect to the open space impacts that were 

disclosed in the FEIS, measures were identified which could improve overall open space 

conditions but which would not constitute mitigation for the significant adverse impacts.  Such 

measures include:  funding improvements to two school yard open spaces in the rezoning area 

(P.S. 118 and P.S. 160) through the City's Schoolyards to Playground initiative, which program 

the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) will continue to seek funding for 

in the next fiscal year; continued efforts by DPR and DCP to identify sites for long term 

opportunities for open space improvements in the Jamaica area; and continued efforts by DPR to 

work with other city agencies to identify unused and 

unprogrammed space in the rezoning area for open space use.  The Commission also notes that 

concerns expressed during the public review process with regard to infrastructure are being 

actively considered by the relevant agencies under the auspices of an Interagency Task Force. 

Other Zoning Text Issues 

 The Borough President recommended that Section 115-224 of the proposed text be amended to 

allow a maximum height of 290 feet on Blocks 9998 and 9999 and that Section 115-20 be 

amended by adding a waiver for properties adjacent to rail road embankments from the required 

rear yard.  This concern was also expressed by other speakers who suggested the rear yard 

 75 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
requirements on these blocks be reduced.  The Commission recognizes the unique development 

constraints on these key sites, but believes that these requests warrant further public review. 

Therefore, the Commission has asked the Department of City Planning to draft a follow-up 

zoning text amendment that would address this issue.   

The Commission heard testimony from the owner of a concrete business located at 95th Avenue 
and 147th Place, who objected to the rezoning of his property from M1-1 to R5  While the 

Commission believes that it would be inappropriate to retain the existing M1-1 district on this 

site because of the close proximity to residences and also to Sutphin Boulevard, the Commission 

notes that the site is occupied by a viable business that is also at the edge of what will continue to 

be an industrial district.  Its operations do not directly impact on the improvements envisioned 

for the Sutphin Boulevard corridor.   The Commission is therefore adopting herein further 

modification to the text that will provide the owner of this concrete plant a ten-year period in 

which to expand.  The Commission notes that while this revised text will address this business 

owner’s intended expansion, the concrete plant must continue to meet the same performance 

standards that exist under the M1-1 district today. 

The Commission recognizes that during the environmental review process and as disclosed in the 

FEIS, (E) designations placed on development sites under the rezoning due to nearby industrial 

source air emissions would have severely constrained any new development, enlargement, or 

change in use at these locations.  The Commission believes that the proposed modification to the 

text amendment set forth in Section 11-151 of the Zoning Resolution is appropriate to allow 

development to continue on these sites and adjacent properties under the existing zoning 

regulations, while allowing development to occur pursuant to the rezoning, as modified, at such 

time as the industrial air emissions are addressed.  The Commission also believes that the 

proposed modification to the Special District text, (ZR Section 115-16), which would restrict     

Use Group 16 facilities in areas currently zoned C8-1 from converting to Use Group 17 uses, is 

appropriate in order to ensure that additional industrial air emissions do not occur in the affected 

area.   

 76 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
The Commission also has made further modification of the text that is necessary to clarify the 

location of the street wall on properties along Archer Avenue where a public place is planned to 

be mapped as part of the Station Plaza project proposed separately by EDC and DOT. 

JAMAICA GATEWAY URBAN RENEWAL PLAN 

The Commission believes that the proposed urban renewal strategy would complement the 

rezoning of three key blocks which are central to the future image of Jamaica.  While it is likely 

that the zoning changes and other public investments in Downtown Jamaica will encourage the 

development of these blocks, and that the tools of urban renewal may not be needed, there are 

conditions on these blocks that are deterrents to redevelopment.  Urban renewal acquisition may 

then be necessary to facilitate new development. 

AMENDMENT TO THE CITY MAP 
The proposed amendment to the City Map involving the demapping of a portion of 148th Street 
between 94th and 95th avenues would facilitate the development of an approximately 1.26 million 

square foot commercial building that will provide approximately 700 parking spaces.  The 

Commission understands that the additional floor area generated from the demapped portion of 
148th Street is necessary for the development of this project.  The Commission notes that an 

interagency conference was held on November 17, 2006 and no objection was raised from any 

city agency concerning this proposed action.     

DISPOSITION OF ONE CITY OWNED PROPERTY 

The Commission believes the proposed disposition of Block 10209, Lot 115, occupied by a 

45,000 square foot underutilized, city-owned garage structure will provide an opportunity for 

redevelopment of this site for uses that will better serve the Jamaica community.   

 77 

C 070314 (A) ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Commission heard testimony recommending that future development on this property 

include affordable housing.  The Commission is aware that HPD has expressed interest in 

working with EDC towards the possible inclusion of affordable units in future development on 

this site.   

The Commission acknowledges the extraordinary level of community participation which 

occurred during the development and public review of the Jamaica Plan.  The modified 

application, and the further modifications adopted herein, responds to this remarkable input, and 

the Commission believes that the Jamaica Plan has been made stronger as a result. 

RESOLUTION 

