 

On June 4, 2008 (Calendar No. 4), the City Planning Commission scheduled June 18, 2008 for a public 

hearing on this application (C 080371 ZMQ) along with the related application (N 080372 ZRQ and N 

080373 ZRQ). The hearing was duly held on June 18, 2008 (Calendar No. 14) in conjunction with the 

hearing on the related application (N 080372 ZRQ and N 080373 ZRQ).  There were 9 speakers in favor 

and 6 opposed. 

Those in support included the District Manager of Queens Community District 14, members of 

Community Board 14, and local residents within the study area.   

27 

C 080371 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
The district manager testified in favor of the rezoning, but requested further study of all areas proposed to 

be zoned to R7A. 

A resident of Rockaway Park testified in favor of the proposed R7A district on Beach 116th Street citing 

the deteriorated quality of the corridor and the lack of viable retail and services.  Another resident of the 

area also testified in favor of the proposed R7A on Beach 116th Street.  The speaker indicated that the 

existing R5 zoning, in place since 1961, has not provided enough incentive to encourage redevelopment 

and improvement on the southern end of Beach 116th Street.  The speaker also testified recent 

developments in the existing R7A provided nearly 100% off-street parking exceeding both the current 

50% parking requirement and the proposed text change for an 85% parking requirement. 

Six speakers indicated that they were in favor of the rezoning but also expressed specific concerns. Two 

speakers expressed concerns about the proposed R7A extension on Beach 116th Street.  The two speakers 

testified that the proposed R7A could add to traffic congestion and further complicate finding off-street 

parking.   Both speakers requested R5D be considered instead of the proposed R7A.  Four speakers 

testified in favor of the rezoning but requested that portion of proposed R4A and R4-1 districts north of 

Seagirt Boulevard in Far Rockaway remain R5.  They stated that the proposed rezoning would affect 

plans to expand Yeshiva Darchei Torah.   The Executive Director of the Jewish Community Council of 

Far Rockaway, testified in support of the proposed R7A on Beach 116th Street, but also requested to retain 

portions of the existing R5 district north of Seagirt Boulevard. 

There were 6 speakers, residents of the areas being rezoned R7A, in opposition to the proposed rezoning.   

One speaker testified that the environmental assessment was inadequate and that too few sites were 

considered in the analysis. The executive vice-president of the Belle Harbor Property Owners Association 

testified that R5D would be more appropriate than R7A.  Two residents of Rockaway Park testified that 

the proposed R7A districts were not in context with the character of the neighborhood and that new 

development would not be required to provide new commercial uses.  Two members of the Coalition to 

Save the Rockaways noted that 1,200 emails had been sent to elected officials by area residents in 

28 

C 080371 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
opposition to R7A.  The speakers also testified that too few sites were considered in the environmental 

assessment, R7A would be out of context with the surrounding neighborhood and that R5D would 

encourage more reasonable development. 

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed.     

Waterfront Revitalization Program Consistency Review  

This application was reviewed by the Department of City Planning for consistency with the policies of the 

New York City Waterfront Revitalization Program (WRP), as amended, approved by the New York City 

Council on October 13, 1999 and by the New York State Department of State on May 28, 2002, pursuant 

to the New York State Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of 1981 (New York State 

Executive Law, Section 910 et seq.).  The designated WRP number is 08-041.  This action was 

determined to be consistent with the policies of the New York City Waterfront Revitalization Program. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map, as modified herein, in conjunction 

with the amendments to the Zoning Resolution, is appropriate. 

The Commission believes that this rezoning represents a comprehensive zoning update for 

the Rockaways.  Existing zoning permits a wide range of housing types, including detached, semi-

detached residences, attached rowhouses, as well as large apartment buildings. The variety of building 

types and occupancies permitted has resulted in development that is inconsistent with the established built 

character of the Rockaway neighborhoods.   The proposed lower-density and contextual zoning will 

preserve the scale and character of the individual Rockaway neighborhoods and ensure that future 

residential development will be predictable and in context with traditional building patterns.   The 

Commission also believes the rezoning provides very focused opportunities for moderate growth on 

Beach Channel Drive, Rockaway Beach Boulevard and Beach 116th Street.  

The Commission believes that the few areas proposed to be rezoned to R5D, R6A, R7A, C4-3A and C4-4 

29 

C 080371 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
would spur reinvestment and encourage new mixed-used, moderate-density development on largely 

vacant or underutilized sites close to transit hubs, along the area’s wider streets and key commercial 

corridors.    

The Commission believes that the proposed extension of the R7A district is appropriate on Beach 116th 

Street.  The proposed R7A district is easily accessible to the last stop on the A train and, when mapped 

with C1-3 commercial overlay, will generally promote mixed-use buildings at moderate densities which 

would also foster commercial reinvestment along Beach 116th Street, Rockaway Park’s main commercial 

street.  The rezoning would extend the existing R7A district to reinforce the mid-rise character on the 

waterfront blocks.        

Based on discussions with the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) the Commission is 

modifying the proposed R7A zoning on two block portions on Beach 105th Street and Rockaway Beach 

Boulevard to R5D.  Development to the maximum height of 80 feet as permitted by the R7A could affect 

the renewal of NYS DEC permits for the DEP water pollution control facility located to the north of 

Beach 105th Street.  The Commission notes the modified rezoning of the two block portions to an R5D 

district will simply extend the zoning currently proposed on adjacent block portions located on the north 

side of Rockaway Beach Boulevard between Beach 102nd Street and Beach 108th Street.  The extension of 

the proposed R5D district will set a 40 foot maximum building height, the same as the existing R5 district 

but will increase the maximum FAR from 1.25 to 2.0.  The Commission believes this change to the 

proposal will ensure that new development on the corridor will be consistent with recent four story 

development accomplished on an adjacent block portion 

The Commission is also modifying the application to retain existing R5 zoning in Far Rockaway: on the 

block portion south of Plainview Avenue between Beach 18th Street and Beach 17th Street originally 

proposed to be zoned R4A and on the block portion south of New Haven Avenue between Beach 17th 

Street and Beach 15th Street originally proposed to be zoned R4-1.  The Commission notes the testimony 

at its hearing by representatives of Yeshiva Darchei Torah that the existing R5 zoning will permit the 

expansion of a school on one block portion and related single-family, semi-detached residential buildings 

30 

C 080371 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
on another.  The Commission notes that building plans have already been submitted and approved by the 

Department of Buildings pursuant to the existing R5 zoning.  The Commission believes the existing R5 

zoning is appropriate for these two block portions and that new development will be consistent with the 

surrounding context.    

The Commission believes that the reduction of the existing commercial overlays will better preserve 

existing neighborhood character by preventing the expansion of potentially incompatible commercial uses 

onto residentially developed side streets.  The Commission notes the introduction of new C1-3 and C2-3 

overlays on Rockaway Beach Boulevard and Beach Channel Drive will help generate new local retail 

opportunities and bring existing commercial uses into compliance.  

The Commission also believes the proposed zoning text amendments are appropriate.  The Commission 

notes the unique demand for additional accessory off-street parking in the moderate density, auto-

dependant sections of Queens Community District 14.  Additionally, the Commission believes that 

permitting mapping of the R2X district in Far Rockaway will allow for the expansion of single family 

homes that meet the needs of residents in this portion of Far Rockaway. The Commission also believes 

the proposed R2X will ensure more predictable development than the existing R2 zoning by establishing 

a consistent perimeter wall height of 21 feet and a maximum building height of 35 feet. 

RESOLUTION 

