 

On July 23, 2008 (Calendar No. 7), the City Planning Commission scheduled August 13, 2008, for a 

public hearing on this application (N 080363 ZRQ).  The hearing was duly held on August 13, 2008 

(Calendar No. 7), in conjunction with the hearing for the related actions (C 080276 MMQ, C 080362 

ZMQ, C 080364 PQQ, and C 080365 HAQ).  There were nine speakers in favor of the applications 

37 

N 080363 ZRQ 

 
 
 
and 10 speakers in opposition.   

The speakers in favor of the applications included the project applicants and their consultants, the 

Borough President of Queens, and the chair of Community Board 2.  The applicant's representatives 

and the Queens Borough President testified about the importance of middle income housing to the 

city's economy in light of recent declines in the middle income housing stock and the dearth of 

housing programs for the middle class and also explained that the mapped parkland proposed for the 

Hunter's Point South site would be under the department's jurisdiction, programmed with a mix of 

active and passive uses, and would connect the larger Hunter's Point neighborhood to the waterfront. 

The Community Board 2 Chair noted that a good inter-agency working relationship had produced a 

good plan, and also reviewed many of the recommendations in the board's resolution, including its 

recommendation for broader income bands for the affordable housing on the Hunter’s Point South 

site.   

Speakers  testifying  against  the  applications  included  representatives  from  the  Pratt  Center  for 

Community Development, Queens Community House, Catholic Charities of Brooklyn and Queens, 

the  New  York  Immigration  Coalition,  and  Congregations  United  in  Queens.    While  all  of  the 

speakers testifying in opposition support the idea of redeveloping the two sites, they testified that the 

income eligibility for the 3,000 affordable units on the Hunter's Point South site should be lowered 

to include low- and moderate-income individuals and families.   

There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed. 

Waterfront Revitalization Program Consistency Review 

This application (N 080363 ZRQ), in conjunction with those for the related actions  

(C 080276 MMQ, C 080362 ZMQ, C 080364 PQQ, and C 080365 HAQ), was reviewed by the 

Department of City Planning for consistency with the policies of the New York City Waterfront 

Revitalization Program (WRP), as amended, approved by the New York City Council on October 

13, 1999 and by the New York State Department of State on May 28, 2002, pursuant to the New 

York State Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of 1981 (New York State Executive 

38 

N 080363 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
Law, Section 910 et seq.).  The designated WRP number is 08-037. 

This action was determined to be consistent with the policies of the New York City Waterfront 

Revitalization Program. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this text amendment to the Zoning Resolution (N 080363 ZRQ), as 

modified herein, in conjunction with the related applications for changes to the City Map (C 080276 

MMQ), amendments to the Zoning Map (C 080362 ZMQ), acquisition of property (C 080364 PQQ), 

and UDAAP/disposition of property (C 080365 HAQ), is appropriate.    

The  applications  for  zoning  map  and  text  amendments,  amendments  to  the  City  Map,  and 

applications  for  acquisition  and  disposition  of  city-owned  property  would  facilitate  the 

redevelopment of the Hunter's Point South site and a privately-owned site across Second Street to 

the east (Site B), contributing significantly to the city's goal of creating 165,000 units of affordable 

housing by 2013.  Up to 3,000 units of middle-income housing would be provided on the Hunter's 

Point South site itself, and up to 330 units of low- and moderate-income housing could be provided 

through the redevelopment of Site B if the developer of the site uses the Inclusionary Zoning bonus 

in the SHP District.  The Commission believes that the largely residential development program for 

the Hunter's Point South site better reflects the site's location and the city's overall planning and 

development strategy for the Hunter's Point neighborhood than the office and residential program 

approved for the site in 1990.  

The Hunter's Point South site and Site B are significant sites along the East River and Newtown 

Creek shorelines.  The Hunter's Point South site runs approximately one-half mile along the East 

River shoreline, directly across from Midtown Manhattan, while Site B, situated slightly east of the 

intersection of the East River and Newtown Creek, is directly across from Greenpoint, Brooklyn. 

While the Commission believes the R7-3, R10, and C2-5 districts are the most appropriate zoning 

districts  for  the  two  sites,  the  Commission  further  believes  that  the  prominence  of  these  sites, 

combined with their special role in providing significant amounts of affordable housing, require the 

39 

N 080363 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
special zoning provisions of the proposed SHP District.  The Commission believes that the SHP 

District provisions, which regulate the height, size and location of tower elements and building base 

heights, specify locations for mandatory ground floor non-residential uses, create special floor area 

ratios  for  the  East  River  Subdistrict  and  floor  area  bonus  provisions  for  the  Newtown  Creek 

Subdistrict, with the modifications described herein, will ensure the city's goals of creating active,  

pedestrian-scaled and landscaped streets, buildings with pedestrian-scaled bases, varying tower 

shapes and sizes with articulated tops, and sustainable elements such as landscaped roofs.     

At the time the application for zoning text amendments was referred, the Commission expressed 

concern that the provisions for tower top articulation in Section 125-34(a) of the proposed text were 

insufficient.  This section allowed, but did not mandate, articulation on all four sides of a tower.  The 

Commission, therefore, is modifying Section125-34(a) to mandate building setbacks on all sides of 

the top forty feet of the portion of a building exceeding 165 feet in height to ensure a more desirable 

skyline of tapered towers.  Additionally the tower tops would no longer be allowed to exceed the 

height limits established in Section 125-34(a). 

The Commission was also concerned about certain height and setback provisions related to building 

base heights.  Section 125-33(b) of the proposed SHP District established a 40 foot minimum base 

height and a maximum 70 foot base height in both the East River and Newtown Creek subdistricts.  

While the Commission notes that a 40 foot base height is needed for portions of buildings on blocks 

E and F in the East River Subdistrict and along a portion of 54th Avenue in the Newtown Creek 

Subdistrict due to the irregular configuration of the blocks or unique topographical conditions, the 

Commission believes a minimum base height of 50 feet is more appropriate for creating a strong, 

pedestrian-scaled building base, and is modifying Section 125-33(b) accordingly.  The Commission 

is also modifying Section 125-33(b) to allow building recesses at a height of not less than 30 feet or 

the height of the second story, whichever is greater, instead of the originally proposed 12 feet, to 

further reinforce the building's street wall.  The Commission also believes that the ground floors, 

particularly  those  occupied  by  commercial  uses,  should  be  as  transparent  as  possible,  and  is 

modifying Section 125-12 to increase the transparency requirement for ground floor commercial 

uses from 50 percent to 70 percent.  To address business' operational concerns, 20 percent of the 

required transparency could be of translucent materials.  This change is consistent with transparency 

40 

N 080363 ZRQ 

 
 
requirements  established  recently  in  Downtown  Brooklyn  and  Hudson  Yards.    Lastly,  the 

Commission believes that the sidewalk should feel as open as possible to pedestrians and is therefore 

modifying Section 125-32 of the proposed text to not allow balconies in portions of buildings below 

a height of 70 feet. 

The Commission also expressed concern about the lack of a requirement for planting and other 

pedestrian  amenities  for  the  small  public  open  areas  required  on  blocks  B,  D,  E,  and  F.    The 

Commission is therefore modifying the proposed text to establish new design provisions in Section 

125-43  for  these  required  open  areas,  including  requirements  for  tree  planting,  planting  beds, 

seating, lighting, and other pedestrian amenities, to ensure that these spaces function as the public, 

pedestrian  oases  originally  envisioned  for  these  locations.    The  Commission  is  also  modifying 

Section 125-52(b) of the proposed text to increase the minimum landscaping requirement for parking 

garage rooftops from 40 percent to 50 percent.  The Commission believes this change will help 

reduce storm water runoff and improve the rooftop aesthetics without compromising the need to 

locate required mechanical equipment.  

The Commission believes the C2-5 District and SHP District provisions establish a good ground 

floor use strategy for both sites.  The C2-5 overlay, established at a depth of 75 feet on Second 

Street, Borden Avenue, and Center Boulevard along blocks A, D, E, and F, provides sufficient 

capacity for local retail and other commercial uses.  To ensure lively ground floors and integration 

with the inland Hunter's Point neighborhood, the SHP District would require non-residential uses 

along Second Street.  While the Commission notes the new supermarket that recently at Queens 

West, north of the Hunter's Point South site, and the new supermarket projected to open along 51st 

Avenue, east of the Hunter’s Point South site, the Commission urges the sponsoring agencies of the 

Hunter's Point South project to encourage a grocery store to locate on one of the southerly blocks 

along Second Street to serve the expected population in this vicinity, which is the greatest distance 

away from existing neighborhood supermarkets.  The Commission believes requiring non-residential 

uses along Center Boulevard on blocks D and E, where the curvature of the road forms a slight 

enclosure around a small cove in the river facing Midtown Manhattan, provides an attractive setting 

for restaurants and cafes. 

41 

N 080363 ZRQ 

 
 
       
The Commission acknowledges the challenges posed by the irregular configuration and relatively 

large size of Site B and believes the proposed 1.0 floor area bonus for a publicly accessible private 

street and an adjacent publicly accessible private landscaped open area is the appropriate solution for 

the site.  The new street would provide necessary circulation space for pedestrians, bicycles, and 

vehicles within the site while the new public open space would provide much-needed recreation 

space and landscaping.  The proposed 1.25 floor area bonus for Inclusionary Zoning would help to 

address the city's strong need for permanent low- and moderate-income affordable housing.  The 

Commission  notes  the  concerns  of  the  Site  B  property  owner  regarding  the  potential  need  for 

resident access through the public open space to a lobby entrance for the building, as well as the 

need to clarify the design review and approvals process for the public open area in the event Site B 

is  developed  before  the  park  along  55th  Avenue  at  Hunter's  Point  South.    Accordingly,  the 

Commission is modifying Map 8 of the SHP District to allow one 13 foot walkway through the 

public open area for lobby access and Section 125-45 to require design review and approval by the 

Chair of the City Planning Commission and the Commissioner of DPR in the event design standards 

have not been developed for the public open space on Site B before the site is developed.   

The Commission supports the first Waterfront Access Plan for the Queens side of Newtown Creek.  

This often-maligned water body has been the focus of a dedicated group of residents, businesses, and 

elected officials who are succeeding in their efforts to require the long-delayed clean-up of the creek 

and surrounding blocks in Greenpoint, Brooklyn and Maspeth, Queens, located several miles from 

Site B.  The Newtown Creek Waterfront Access Plan will ensure locations for the required Upland 

Connection and Supplemental Public Access on Site B to seamlessly integrate them into the required 

Shore Public Walkway and new publicly accessible private road and open area elements. 

The new street grid and public parkland resulting from the changes to the City Map are critical to 

integrating  new  development  with  inland  blocks  and  providing  access  for  the  first  time  to  the 

majority of the East River and Newtown Creek shoreline on the Hunter's Point South site.  The 

Commission believes it is important that the proposed street network will restore the 50th Avenue 

view corridor eliminated by the 1990 changes to the City Map.  The Commission notes that this 

42 

N 080363 ZRQ 

 
   
 
 
view corridor provides a perfect view of the Empire State Building.  The Commission supports the 

proposed street widths, which are designed to address the needs of pedestrians, bicycles, vehicles, 

and the Fire Department's safety requirements.  The east-west side streets would generally be 60 feet 

in width, except for Borden Avenue, which would be 92 feet in width.  Center Boulevard would also 

generally be 60 feet in width, while the width of Second Street would be 75 feet except for the 

portion of the street along Block C, where the width would remain 74 feet due to the existing vent 

shaft building.  Sidewalk widths would be 15 feet on Center Boulevard, Borden Avenue, and Second 

Street, and 13 feet on all other streets.  To preclude inappropriate encroachments into the public 

realm, the Commission is modifying Section 14-44 to not allow enclosed sidewalk cafes.  The 

Commission notes that tree planting requirements for the mapped streets would be required through 

the recently adopted citywide tree-planting text change and it supports the modified tree planting 

provision that clarifies the street tree planting requirement for the private road required through a 

bonus provision in the Newtown Creek Subdistrict.  The Commission notes that the SHP District 

curb cut provisions support pedestrian activities by precluding curb cuts on the wide streets, with the 

exception of one curb cut along Second Street on Site B, and establishing limited curb cut locations 

for the narrow streets.  The Commission notes Community Board 2's recommendation to retain 

Second Street as a two-way street but believes that the separated, two-way bicycle lane created by 

changing Second Street to a one-way street is a better outcome for the neighborhood and the city-

wide bike network. 

The Commission looks forward to the realization of the nearly 11 acres of public parkland on the 

Hunter's  Point  South  site,  most  of  which  would  be  located  along  the  East  River.    It  urges  the 

Economic Development Corporation and its consultants, the Department of Parks and Recreation, 

and the Department of City Planning to preserve the point at the southernmost end of the site as a 

critical element of the park design.  The Commission notes that this land feature is the community’s 

namesake, being originally owned by George Hunter, and also notes that it rises notably higher than 

the rest of the Hunter's Point site, providing a remarkable change in topography with unique design 

opportunities.  The Commission acknowledges the concerns of Community Board 2 in its desire to 

provide an appropriate mix of passive and active recreational opportunities and it urges the involved 

agencies and design consultants to include Community Board 2 and Hunter's Point residents and 

43 

N 080363 ZRQ 

 
 
businesses in the design process for the park. 

The Commission acknowledges the desire expressed by Community Board 2 in its recommendation 

and public testimony and by representatives of affordable housing groups in their public testimony 

for broader income bands for the affordable housing on the Hunter's Point South site.  While specific 

income levels on the Hunter's Point South site are beyond the scope of this action, the Commission 

notes that the city's affordable housing crisis also extends to middle income families.  The has 

experienced a decline in the amount of middle income housing, due largely to a lack of housing 

subsidies for middle income housing and a loss of 40,000 units from the Mitchell Lama housing 

program, a program enacted by the New York State legislature in 1955 to subsidize middle and 

moderate income housing.  The program expired in the mid-70's and no Federal or State housing 

programs have been adopted since then to support new housing for moderate and middle income 

individuals.  In contrast, a number of housing programs have been created for low and moderate 

income families.  By 2015, mortgages will expire on 59 additional Mitchell Lama developments 

representing more than 40,000 units, and all or most of these units could become market rate.  The 

current and potential housing loss has enormous ramifications on the city's ability to maintain an 

economically diverse population and attract and retain employees, many of whom perform essential 

city services such as police, fire, sanitation, teaching, and nursing.  The Hunter's Point South project 

will help retain middle income households by creating a neighborhood affordable to them. 

The Commission notes the work of Community Board 2 and the extensive outreach and coordination 

undertaken by the city in developing the project.  The Commission urges the involved agencies to 

continue their collaborative efforts as the project is implemented and to include Community Board 2 

and the Hunter’s Point neighborhood in decision-making for the project.  The Commission looks 

forward to the project's realization. 

RESOLUTION 

