  

9 

C 080101 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
On December 5, 2007 (Calendar No. 14) the City Planning Commission scheduled December 19, 

2007 for a public hearing on this application (C 080101 ZMQ). The hearing was duly held on 

December 19, 2007 (Calendar No. 34).   There were no speakers and the hearing was closed.  

CONSIDERATION  

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate. 

The Commission believes that the proposed zoning changes would better reflect the variety of 

existing contexts in the Briarwood community and ensure that future development would be 

consistent with well-established development patterns.    

The Commission notes that the approximately 39-block rezoning area consists of several distinct 

subareas, the largest of which is a 22-block area proposed to be rezoned to R3X from R3A.  The 

Commission notes that the proposed R3X would require a wider minimum lot width of 35 feet, 

thereby reducing the potential for subdivision on the area’s wide lots.  The Commission believes 

that this change would reinforce the existing neighborhood character by allowing development to 

be at a density more compatible with existing conditions. 

The Commission also believes that the proposed zoning changes from R3A and R4 to R4-1 

would more appropriately reflect the mix of one- and two- family detached and semi-detached 

residences on portions of five blocks located at the northeastern corner of the rezoning area 

between Smedley Street and Parsons Boulevard and southern edge of the rezoning area between 

144th and 148th Streets.   Furthermore, the proposed zoning change from R4-1 to R4A would 

better reflect the existing one- and two- family detached houses on portions of two blocks east of 

139th Street between 86th and 87th Avenues.   

10 

C 080101 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The Commission believes that the proposed zoning changes from R4 and R6A to R4B would 

better reflect the two-story rowhouses that are predominant on portions of the subject blocks and 

would ensure that future development is in keeping with the existing contexts. 

The Commission also believes that an R4 district proposed to be mapped on a portion of 85th 

Drive east of 139th Street would better reflect the two-story row house development on these 

properties that have front yard parking.      The Commission believes that the moderate density 

R5D district is appropriate on two blocks and a portion of another in the northeast corner of the 

rezoning area and on a portion of one block bounded by Burden Crescent and 84th Drive.  The 

proposed change would prevent out-of-character development and more closely reflect the three- 

and four-story residences on these blocks.   

RESOLUTION  

