 

On July 2, 2008 (Calendar No. 11), the City Planning Commission scheduled July 23, 2008 for a 

public hearing on this application (C 080462 ZMQ).   The hearing was duly held on July 23, 

2008 (Calendar No. 30).  There were seven speakers in favor of the application.  

Those speaking in favor of the application included the City Councilmember from District 31, 

the Chair of Queens Community Board 13, and several neighborhood residents including a 

community board member, a representative of the Federation of Laurelton Block Associations 

and the President of the 224-225th Street Block Association.  

The City Councilmember from District 31 testified that the rezoning proposals constituted a 

good plan for Laurelton and requested that the Commission adopt the zoning amendments 

expeditiously. 

The Federation of Laurelton Block Associations representative stated that many landmark-

quality homes were demolished and replaced with multifamily dwellings while the rezoning 

21 

C 080462 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
study was underway.  The chair of the community board testified that all the work and 

community outreach resulted in a fine-tuned zoning plan for the area.  The 224th-225th Block 

Association president stated that the rezoning proposal would help Laurelton remain a low 

density residential community.  The community board member stated that the Laurelton 

community was willing to accept moderate-density zoning on Merrick Boulevard because the 

rest of Laurelton’s one- and two-family homes were being preserved.  She also requested, as did 

the two remaining speakers, that the Commission quickly adopt the proposed zoning.   

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed.     

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this application to amend the Zoning Map is appropriate.  

The Commission notes that the existing zoning in Laurelton is unchanged since 1961, and it has 

increasingly resulted in housing types and occupancies that are inconsistent with the area’s 

established one- and two-family character.  The Commission also notes that the proposed lower-

density and contextual residential zoning designations closely correspond to the area’s existing 

and distinct building patterns, reflecting Laurelton’s built context. 

The Commission believes that expanding an existing R2 will reflect and preserve the 

predominant single-family character of those blocks.  The Commission also believes the 

22 

C 080462 ZMQ 

  
   
 
 
 
proposed R2A zoning will ensure that new development and expansions of existing homes 

would be within an envelope that better reflects the area’s existing context. 

The Commission notes that the proposed R3A and R3X districts permit only detached one- or 

two-family structures on lots with a minimum width of 25 feet and 35 feet, respectively.  

Therefore, the potential for subdivision of the area’s lots will be reduced and development of 

semi-detached and row house structures will be prevented in most of the rezoning area.  The 

Commission further notes that the proposed R3-1 district reflects the one- and two-family, semi-

detached structures that predominate in that district.  The Commission believes that these zoning 

designations will reinforce the existing neighborhood character by allowing development to be at 

a density more compatible with existing conditions. 

The Commission believes that an R3-2 district proposed for four blocks currently zoned R2 is 

appropriate.  The proposed district is limited to blocks that are occupied by a garden apartment 

complex and the action would bring the development into conformance and compliance with 

zoning regulations.  The proposed R4B zoning district will better reflect the existing two-story 

row houses that are predominant on the subject blocks. 

The Commission believes that the proposed R5D district will provide opportunities for moderate 

growth along Merrick Boulevard.   This action will facilitate contextual residential, community 

facility or mixed-use development with local retail services on Laurelton’s primary thoroughfare 

where housing is currently prohibited under the existing zoning.   

23 

C 080462 ZMQ 

  
 
 
  
The Commission believes that the new C1-3 and C2-3 overlays will encourage new and reinforce 

existing local convenience retail and service uses along Merrick Boulevard and around the 

railroad station.  The Commission also believes that eliminating commercial overlays from 

certain block fronts and reducing the depth of most overlay districts on Merrick Boulevard will 

more closely match existing land use and development patterns and prevent encroachment of 

potentially incompatible commercial uses into the residential side streets. 

RESOLUTION  

