 

On July 2, 2008 (Cal. No. 8), the Commission scheduled July 23, 2008 for a public hearing on this application 

(C 080457 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on July 23, 2008 (Calendar No. 33).  There were 19 speakers in 

favor of the application and 26 speakers in opposition.   

Persons  speaking  in  support  included  the  Chair  of  Community  Board  7,  the  Vice-Chair  and  Land  Use 

Committee Chair for CB 7, the president and several officers of the Waldheim Neighborhood Association, 

representatives from the New York Armenian Home and Flushing YWCA, and 10 neighborhood residents.  A 
representative of the City Councilmember from the 20th District also appeared in favor. 

The  Councilmember’s  representative  acknowledged  the  efforts  of  community  members  and  involved 

stakeholders who worked with his office and the Department of City Planning to ensure an informed rezoning 

process.  He indicated the public outreach undertaken to inform the community about the rezoning and stated 

that  the  proposed  rezoning  is  a  collaborative  effort  that  represents  the  best  attempt  to  preserve  the 

community’s valuable character. 

Community Board 7’s Chair also highlighted the necessity of approving the proposal in order to preserve the 

community’s built fabric. He also testified as to the collaborative effort in formulating the rezoning proposal, 

and he explained the request of the Holly Civic Association to be removed from the rezoning, the history and 

rationale for reformulating the rezoning area boundary lines, and the concerns raised about the proposed R7-1 

zoning.   

The secretary of the Waldheim Neighborhood Association recommended approval of the proposal as quickly 

as possible.  He noted that most of the area is developed with one- and two-family homes, and that recent 

developments allowed by the existing zoning, threaten the neighborhood’s character and historic fabric.  Ten 

neighborhood residents, some members of the WNA, echoed these statements.   

The Chair of the New York Armenian Home explained that the facility needs to meet updated New York 

State codes, and that the proposed  R7-1 zoning would allow the Home to redevelop its property with a 19-

story mixed-use community facility and market rate residential building and offer market-rate housing in 

order to subsidize the necessary facility upgrades.  Representatives from the Flushing YWCA also testified in 

support of the rezoning and noted their long-standing involvement and history of service to the community. 

12 

C 080457 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Speakers  in  opposition  included  members  of  the  Holly Civic Association and residents of 45th Avenue, 
including  members  of  the  45th  Avenue  Homeowner’s  Association,  who  focused  their  concerns  on  the 
proposed extension of an R7-1 District across Kissena Boulevard to encompass the block bounded by 45th 

Avenue, Colden Street, Elder Avenue and Kissena Boulevard.  The speakers expressed concern over the 

potential impact of new development and residential growth on their quality of life.  These speakers generally 

stated that they wanted the zoning on this block to remain R6, but many expressed support for the remainder 

of the proposed rezoning.  

Other speakers opposed the proposed R3X district, especially those residents living in close proximity to 

proposed R4A, R4-1 and R4 districts.  These speakers expressed concern that some neighboring properties 

would not have similar zoning as their property and worried about the potential impact of the proposed R3X 

zoning on their property values.  They requested that their properties be rezoned R4 or R5, or at a minimum 

retain the existing R3-2 general residence district. 

There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed.     

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate. 

The Commission notes that the existing zoning in Waldheim has been unchanged since 1961, which has 

allowed new construction that is inconsistent with the area’s traditional building patterns.  The Commission 

notes that the existing R3-2 general residence district allows housing types and densities that are out-of-

character in the central and eastern portions of the rezoning area primarily developed with one- and two-

family  detached  and  semi-detached  homes.    The  Commission  also  notes  that  the  existing  R6  and  R7-1 

districts found in the northwest portion of rezoning area allow high-rise developments under flexible building 

envelopes that are out-of-scale with primarily six- and seven-story apartment buildings. The Commission 

believes that this action is a comprehensive zoning update for the area in order to curb out-of-character 

buildings and ensure more orderly and predictable development in the future that reflects and reinforces the 

area’s distinct contexts. 

The Commission notes that the proposed R3X and R4A districts permit only detached one- or two-family 

structures on lots with a minimum width of 35 feet and 30 feet, respectively.  The Commission notes that the 

potential for subdivision of the area’s lots will be reduced and development of out-of-context semi-detached 

13 

C 080457 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
 
and row house structures will be prevented in these portions of the rezoning area.  The Commission further 

notes that the proposed R4-1 zoning in two sections reflects the one- and two-family, detached and semi-

detached structures that predominate in these portions of the rezoning area.  The Commission believes that 

these zoning designations reflect the existing one- and two-family neighborhood character that predominates 

and will ensure new development to be at densities more compatible with existing conditions. 

The  Commission  believes  that  the  R6A  and  R7B  districts  proposed  for  the  northwestern  portion  of  the 

rezoning area will prevent out-of-scale high-rise development and reinforce the six-and seven-story heights of 

existing apartment buildings.  The Commission believes the proposed extension of an R7-1 district for the 
block bounded Kissena Boulevard, 45th Avenue, Colden Street and Elder Avenue reflects the existing context 

of this block, which contains apartment buildings of 7 to 19 stories in height, and will reinforce the pattern of 

higher  rise  buildings  located  on  the  west  side  of  Kissena  Boulevard,  a  major  thoroughfare  leading  to 

downtown Flushing. 

The Commission believes that the proposed C1-3 overlays will reinforce existing land use patterns where 

convenience retail and service uses are located, including the three partial block fronts at Parsons Boulevard 
and  45th  Avenue  near  Flushing  Hospital  which had previously lacked commercial overlay zoning.  The 

Commission also believes that reducing the depth of existing overlay districts on portions of Bowne Street 

will prevent the encroachment of potentially incompatible commercial uses into the residential side streets. 

The  Commission  acknowledges  Community  Board  7’s  recommendation  and  the  concerns  expressed  by 

speakers at the Commission’s public hearing requesting to retain the R6 district rather than change to an R7-1 
district  for  the  block  bounded  Kissena  Boulevard,  45th  Avenue,  Colden  Street  and  Elder  Avenue.    The 

Commission  notes  that  the  subject  block  currently  is  developed  with  a  mix  of  multi-family  apartment 

buildings up to 19 stories in height and densities that range from 2.5 to 3.75 FAR. The Commission believes 

that typical developments allowed by the proposed R7-1 district would match the existing character of the 

area, and that its location along the Kissena Boulevard corridor makes the block suitable for a moderate 

increase in residential units.  The Commission also acknowledges support for this element of the proposed 

rezoning from the Borough President. 

The Commission also recognizes the concerns expressed by residents and property owners regarding the 

proposed R3X district.  The Commission notes that the proposed R3X district allows the same maximum 0.6 

FAR and maximum 35-foot building height as the existing R3-2 zoning, and it would allow the conversion of 

14 

C 080457 ZMQ 

  
 
 
 
 
one-family buildings to two-family buildings.  The Commission believes that the proposed R3X zone would 

appropriately provide flexibility for current property owners to enlarge or even add a residential unit while 

protecting the detached building context that defines the area where this zoning is proposed. 

RESOLUTION 

