 

On July 23, 2008 (Calendar No. 12), the City Planning Commission scheduled August 13, 2008, 

for a public hearing on this application (N 080382 ZRQ).   The hearing was duly held on August 

13, 2008 (Calendar No. 12), in conjunction with the hearings for the related actions (C 080831 

ZMQ, N 080383 HGQ, C 080384 HUQ, C 080385 HDQ and C 080221 MMQ). 

There were 40 speakers in favor of the application and related actions and 14 speakers in 

opposition. 

Those who spoke in support included the Borough President; the New York State Senator from 
the 16th District; the Chair, Land Use Co-Chair and members of Community Board 7; and 

representatives of EDC and HPD and their consultants.  Others who spoke on behalf of the 

proposal included representatives of the Flushing/Willets Point/Corona Local Development 

Corporation; Queens Chamber of Commerce; Regional Plan Association; Queens Chapter of the 

American Institute of Architects; Flushing Development Center; Asian American Elderly 

Housing Corporation; Jamaica Business Resource Center; Partnership for New York City; New 

Yorkers for Parks; Environmental Defense Fund; New York Hall of Science; New York City 

Central Labor Council; New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council; Building and Construction 

 28 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Trades Council of Greater New York; New York City League of Conservation Voters; Women 

Builders Council; and Mason Tenders’ District Council Political Action Committee. 

Those who spoke in opposition included business and property owners and members of the 

Willets Point Industry and Realty Association (WPIRA); WPIRA’s environmental counsel and 

consulting engineers; local workers; and an area resident.  Other opponents who spoke on the 

proposal were representatives of the Public Advocate; Asian Americans for Equality (AAFE); 

and Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now (ACORN). 

The elected officials, city representatives, local development organizations, and environmental 

advocacy group representatives speaking in favor highlighted the physical, social and economic 

benefits offered by the Plan.  In describing her ongoing involvement in the planning efforts for 

redevelopment at Willets Point with the Downtown Flushing Task Force and the Willets Point 

Advisory Committee (WPAC), the Borough President praised the Plan as a catalyst for economic 

growth for Queens and New York City.  The New York State Senator reinforced the Borough 

President’s support for the Plan, emphasizing the anticipated economic benefits of investment in 

the area and the much-needed clean up of the contaminated site. 

The President of the Flushing/Willets Point/Corona Local Development Corporation (and former 

Borough President) described the timeliness and necessity of redeveloping Willets Point to create 

local employment and business opportunities, improve the environment and overall quality of 

life for local residents, and promote the development of new housing.  The President of the 

Queens Chamber of Commerce further stressed the importance of providing a convention center 

and hotel to generate jobs and stimulate the local economy.  Citing her organization’s record of 

investment in Queens, the President of the Partnership for New York also endorsed the Plan as 

an important stimulus for economic growth, community revitalization and environmental 

remediation. 

Representatives of the Regional Plan Association, Environmental Defense Fund, New Yorkers 

for Parks, and the New York Hall of Science spoke favorably about the area-wide environmental 

 29 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
and cultural benefits of the Plan.  In particular, the representative from the Environmental 

Defense Fund pointed to the opportunity for the City to create a sustainable community from the 

ground up at Willets Point.  The representative of the New York Hall of Science expressed 

support for the Plan and its potential for enhancing recent investments in nearby recreational and 

cultural facilities in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park and Downtown Flushing to create a 

regional draw for tourism and recreation. 

A number of union leaders also testified in support of the Plan.  The representatives of the New 

York City Labor Council and several other union organizations under its umbrella spoke in favor 

of the Plan’s multi-use development program that would result in the creation of construction 

jobs and permanent employment in a diverse array of sectors including retail, office, 

entertainment, restaurant, and hospitality.  In addition, the union representatives applauded the 

agreements made with the City to require the selected developer and contractors to hire union 

workers from State-certified apprentice programs and pay prevailing wages.  The President of 

the Women Builders Council commended the Borough President and Deputy Mayor for their 

commitments to ensuring MWBE participation in the project’s development. 

Most of the speakers who testified in support of the Plan echoed the concerns of the Borough 

President about the welfare of the existing businesses and workers at Willets Point.  While citing 

the physical, environmental, economic and social benefits of redevelopment, proponents urged 

the City to continue negotiations with the property owners, assist businesses with relocation, and 

stand behind commitments to provide job training to workers displaced by the project.   

Many of the speakers who testified in opposition were concerned with issues regarding eminent 

domain.  An owner of an ironworks concern and member of WPIRA contended that the City’s 

characterization of the area as blighted and underutilized is a misrepresentation as there are 

numerous non-automotive-related firms currently operating in the area employing hundreds of 

employees in well-paying jobs.  Another owner of a large-scale, construction and solid waste 

management business operating at Willets Point who is also a member of WPIRA stated that the 

lack of the sanitary sewers and degraded infrastructure and other site conditions are a result of 

 30 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
public, rather than private, neglect.   He further contended that the proposed Plan is ill-conceived 

and insufficiently developed, and that the intended public and environmental benefits do not 

justify the City’s use of eminent domain and consequent discontinuance of thriving 

manufacturing concerns. 

In their testimony in opposition to the project, WPIRA’s environmental counsel and engineering 

consultants questioned assumptions made in the DGEIS regarding traffic impacts and mitigation 

measures as well as hazardous materials impacts to surface and groundwater resources.  Citing 

the significant traffic impacts disclosed in the DGEIS, the traffic engineering consultants noted 

in particular the document’s conclusion that current traffic congestion on baseball game days 

would be worsened as a result of the project, and that some of these impacts would be 

unmitigated.  WPIRA’s environmental counsel raised questions regarding the proposed new 

ramps to and from the Van Wyck Expressway, asserting that the eventual National 

Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process for the ramps might result in a determination that 

they are infeasible, thereby, invalidating the DGEIS traffic analysis.  WPIRA’s environmental 

engineer raised a concern regarding the use of fill to raise the site above the 100-year floodplain, 

contending that adding that much material would inject contamination into the underlying 

aquifer. 

Several area workers expressed concerns over losing their livelihood as a result of the City’s use 

of eminent domain for the benefit of developers; an area resident decried the City’s placement of 

its commercial interests over individual property rights.  Speaking generally in opposition to the 

current proposal, the representative of the Public Advocate urged for adequate time to develop a 

more informed and all-encompassing plan that would ensure that all stakeholders’ concerns are 

sufficiently addressed. 

Many speakers addressed the issue of affordable housing.  An HPD representative noted that 

1,100 out of the proposed total of 5,500 dwelling units would targeted for low-, moderate- and 

middle-income households.  While agreeing with the project’s aim to promote new housing, a 

representative of AAFE spoke in opposition to the current percentage of affordable units to be 

 31 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
provided (20 percent) and targeted income levels qualifying for affordable units; the 

representative recommended that a third of the planned units be allocated for low income 

families.  A representative of ACORN also presented testimony in opposition to the project on 

the grounds that not enough affordable units are planned, especially for low-income families.   

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed.   

WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION PROGRAM CONSISTENCY REVIEW 

This application (N 080382 ZRQ), in conjunction with the application for the related actions (C 

080831 ZMQ, N 080383 HGQ, C 080384 HUQ, C 080385 HDQ and C 080221 MMQ) was 

reviewed by the Department of City Planning for consistency with the policies of the New York 

City Waterfront Revitalization Program (WRP), as amended, approved by the New York City 

Council on October 13, 1999 and by the New York State Department of State on May 28, 2002, 

pursuant to the New York State Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of 1981 

(New York State Executive Law, Section 910 et seq.). The designated WRP number is 08-015. 

This action was determined to be consistent with the policies of the New York City Waterfront 

Revitalization Program. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that the proposed amendment to the Zoning Resolution (N 080382 

ZRQ), as modified herein, in conjunction with the related applications C 080381 ZMQ, N 

080383 HGQ, C 080384 HUQ as modified, C 080385 HDQ, and C 080221 MMQ, is 

appropriate. 

The Commission supports the City’s far-reaching planning and zoning strategy aimed at 

transforming Willets Point into a vibrant, mixed-use, regional destination and sustainable 

neighborhood.  The Commission recognizes that the proposed Plan represents a critical step in 

 32 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementing the Downtown Flushing Development Framework’s land use and economic 

development strategies for north central Queens.  The Plan, the Commission also notes, 

capitalizes on the opportunities in the Willets Point area that make it positioned for growth, 

including its access and proximity to airports, public transit and area-wide sports, recreational 

and cultural attractions as well as the burgeoning adjacent communities of Flushing and Corona.  

The Commission acknowledges that the Plan is also a central component of the Mayor’s PlaNYC 

initiative which aims to create new housing and open space opportunities as well as clean up 

contaminated land throughout the City. 

The Commission notes that the Special District, together with the zoning map change, urban 

renewal plan and other related actions, would set the stage for the development of 8.94 million 

square feet comprising retail and entertainment offerings, a hotel and convention center, 

thousands of mixed-income residential units and new public open spaces and other community 

amenities.  The Commission further notes that the Special District text offers finely-tuned zoning 

tools designed to guide site planning, urban design and publicly-accessible open space elements to 

ensure the development of a sustainable, pedestrian-oriented neighborhood.  The Commission 

believes that the proposed actions represent a significant upgrade in the area’s zoning and 

regulatory controls, utilizing the most up-to-date planning and design practices to provide for 

growth. 

The Commission believes that the proposed zoning change from a predominately manufacturing 

M3-1 District to a C4-4 District would provide for the appropriate mix of commercial, 

residential, and community facility uses essential to establishing a regional center and self-

sustaining neighborhood.  The Commission further believes that the overall density established 

in the Special District text (3.4 FAR), in conjunction with the URP’s maximum development 

envelope of 8.94 million square feet, would promote new development commensurate with the 

site’s strategic significance in the region.  Furthermore, the Commission believes that the 

apportioning of 3.16 million square feet of commercial space and 5.85 million square feet of 

residential floor area, as set forth in the URP, would ensure development of a regional 

 33 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
destination offering intensive retail and entertainment attractions while providing significant 

amounts of new and affordable housing. 

The Commission believes that the Special District provisions, which regulate the types and 

location of uses, street layout, streetscape design, open space amenities and building heights and 

setbacks, would achieve the Plan’s goals of creating a new urban fabric that fittingly combines 

retail and housing in distinctive areas and maximizes the utilization of mass transit.  The 

Commission further believes that the zoning text utilizes numerous strategies to encourage the 

pedestrian orientation of ground floor uses and promotes a continuous, vibrant and walkable 

streetscape environment with landscaped sidewalks, parks and open spaces for both residents and 

visitors. 

The Commission notes that the proposed zoning text would promote active retail uses at the 

ground-floor level throughout the 600-foot-wide retail and entertainment zone and restrict less 

pedestrian-oriented uses such as offices and auto repair shops.  To further encourage pedestrian 

orientation of ground floor uses, the Commission is herein modifying the Special District 
provisions governing the northern and southern anchor blocks on 126th Street to ensure more 

retail continuity.  In particular, the requirement for retail continuity would be expanded to the 

ground floor fronting the pedestrian corridor and plazas that would be created by the required 

DEP easement on Willets Point Boulevard within the southern anchor block.  In reviewing the 

design requirements for the main southern anchor plaza further, the Commission was also 

concerned about the lack of planting requirements; therefore, the Commission is modifying the 

Special District text to require that 15 percent of the plaza is to be planted. 

The Commission believes that the proposed street widths and design parameters suitably 

accommodate the needs of pedestrians, bicycles, vehicles, and potential traffic mitigation 

measures that may be required in the future.  In recognizing the importance of the streetscape 

design called for in the Special District, the Commission is herein modifying the text to ensure 

that all sidewalks would have a minimum dimension of 15 feet on wider streets such as 126th 

Street, the primary retail street and the connector streets, and 13 feet on all other streets measured 

 34 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
from the curb, even where changes in grade occur.  Specifically, at intersections along 126th 

Street where a grade change has to be accommodated, the text would require a combination of 

15-foot-wide tree-lined sidewalks with a nine-foot amenity area for connector streets and 13-

foot-wide tree-lined sidewalks with a 10-foot amenity area for retail streets.   

The Commission notes that the zoning text requires at least eight acres of publicly-accessible 

open space at Willets Point, including a neighborhood park comprising a minimum of two acres.  

The Commission, however, was concerned about the programming and vegetative cover of the 

park, and as a consequence, it is modifying the provisions for the park to require a minimum of 

50 percent of the park is to be planted, including planted beds as well as accessible lawns 

that may be used for playing fields, with a provision that this planting requirement may be 

reduced from 50 to 40 percent if a playground is provided.  Additionally, the Commission’s 

modification will require that an active recreational area of at least one-half acre must be 

provided as part of the development in any one of the locations specified in the text. 

With regard to building bulk, form and design, the Commission believes that, while providing 

appropriate flexibility of architectural design, it is very important that the Special District 

provisions ensure the construction of pedestrian-scaled building bases, varying tower shapes and 

sizes with articulated tops, and components for sustainable building elements such as landscaped 

roofs.  To ensure better articulation of the building tops of towers and form a more varied 

skyline, the Commission is modifying the text so that the three top floors of towers rising above 

120 feet would be limited to a maximum coverage of 80 percent of the floors below.  In addition, 

the setbacks of these top three floors would now have to be provided on all building sides.  In 

recognizing the further need for variety of building arrangements and articulation, the 

Commission is also modifying the text to stipulate that only one building per block would be 

allowed to be exempt from providing setbacks above its base portion and that these ‘sheer tower 

buildings’ could only occur within the four prescribed locations along 126th Street. 

The Commission has given further consideration to the unique provisions that would enhance the 
126th Street corridor and establish it as the development’s premier “front door” address.  To 

 35 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
better reflect the form and uses of Citi Field and create a cohesive “container” of entertainment 

activity, the Commission is modifying two use provisions in the Special District.  First, enclosed 

sidewalk cafes would not be allowed anywhere in the Special District.  Second, physical culture 

establishments (gyms) would not be allowed to occupy the open terrace portion of buildings 
along 126th Street opposite Citi Field where a building setback is provided at a minimum 20-foot 

height.  As a result, only eating and drinking establishments would be allowed to occupy these 

second-story, 15-foot-wide (minimum) open terraces. 

The Commission recognizes that the sign and screening regulations on 126th Street would 

encourage creative visual elements and illuminated and flashing signs similar to those that will 

be installed at Citi Field and believes these provisions would, thereby, complement the 

neighboring Citi Field and solidify the area’s regional retail and entertainment appeal.  

Nonetheless, the Commission recognizes that allowing advertising signs in this area, particularly 

at locations proximate to arterial highways, would not be consistent with prevailing sign 

regulations.  The Commission is, therefore, modifying the Special District text so that only 
accessory illuminated and flashing business signs would be allowed on 126th Street.  The 

Commission is further modifying the text to ensure that no sign attached to a building would 

extend above the parapet wall or roof of the building. 

The Commission acknowledges the significant contribution of the convention center to the City’s 

Plan and the desirability of locating the facility in close proximity to the district’s entertainment 

and retail core, as well as convenient to both mass transit and area highways.  The Commission 

recognizes that during the environmental review process, DEP stipulated that a 40-foot-wide 

easement must be mapped along the existing Willets Point Boulevard right-of-way to provide 

continued access to an existing 72” water main running beneath the boulevard.  The Commission 

notes that this requirement makes it impractical for the southeasterly alternate location for the 

convention center (Option B) to continue to be considered even though it would have been closer 
to 126th Street and the #7 transit line.  The Commission, therefore, is modifying the zoning text 

amendment to eliminate the Option B location; the convention center would now only be located 

in the northerly portion of the site generally within 650’ of Northern Boulevard (Option A).  The 

 36 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
Commission believes the prescribed location to be suitably situated in close proximity to the 

planned Van Wyck access ramps and the retail and entertainment zone, as well as within a 15-

minute walking distance of the #7 transit line.   

The Commission notes that the Special District regulations would set maximum block 

dimensions of 218 feet by 450 feet to ensure overall maximum walkability.  The Commission 

also acknowledges the challenges posed by the design of the new Van Wyck ramps and 

recognizes the necessity of allowing more design flexibility in the northeastern portion of the 
district.  The Commission is, therefore, modifying the distance from 126th Street after which an 

exemption of the 218-foot maximum block dimension would apply on connector streets.   The 

Commission is also creating an additional allowance for one exception to the block dimension 

regulation if pedestrian access around a building on a block (at a distance of 218’ from 

intersection) is provided through a public access area. 

The Commission acknowledges that during its consideration of the application, EDC has 

engaged various urban design and engineering consultants and city agencies in an ongoing 

planning and design process to identify optimal sustainability measures that will facillitate 

LEED-ND certification.  In that regard, the Commission is modifying the text to allow up to five 

percent required off-street parking spaces for residential units to be reserved for rental car share 

spaces without counting toward zoning floor area.  The Commission notes that this provision 

would contribute to reducing private vehicle ownership while still meeting the transportation and 

mobility needs of residents. 

In further support of sustainable planning and design measures, the Commission is also adopting 

the following modifications to the zoning text amendment: 

• 

Increase the maximum right-of-way for the Primary Retail Street from 70 feet to 80 feet.  

This increase would be allowed only to if a 10-foot central median for storm water 

management was provided. 

 37 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  To optimize the feasibility of solar-oriented placement of tower portions of buildings, 75 

percent of the total number of towers would be required to face within 25 degrees 

(instead of 15 degrees) of geographical south. 

•  To facilitate the development of a combined heat and power cogeneration plant, the CPC 

special permit currently set forth in the special district text would be changed to a BSA 

special permit with a commensurate change in the required findings. 

•  Create a BSA special permit to allow a bio-reactor wastewater treatment plant to serve 

district-wide needs.  

• 

Increase the minimum landscaping requirement for parking garage rooftops from 40 

percent to 50 percent.  The Commission believes this change will help reduce storm 

water runoff and improve the rooftop aesthetics without compromising the need to locate 

required mechanical equipment.  

The Commission acknowledges the recommendations of CB 7 and Borough President and the 

large amount of testimony regarding the City’s business assistance and relocation efforts.  The 

Commission notes that, in tandem with the planning and approvals process, EDC launched the 

Willets Point Business Assistance Program to further address the needs of those affected by the 

redevelopment efforts, including owner-occupant businesses, property owners, tenant businesses 

and Willets Point workers.  The Commission notes that EDC has been working on negotiating 

private acquisition and relocation agreements with owner-occupant business and property owners 

in the district.  The Commission further notes that according to EDC, to date, five agreements 

have been reached.  The Commission urges EDC to continue actively negotiating with all willing 

owner-occupant businesses and property owners to achieve additional acquisition agreements in 

the future. 

 38 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Commission recognizes that, at this time, tenant businesses cannot be offered relocation 

sites as such negotiations would interfere with the tenant/landlord relationship.  The Commission 

notes, however, that consultants have been retained to serve as the project’s tenant outreach 

consultants, providing project information to tenant businesses and surveying to understand 

businesses’ needs.  Furthermore, the Commission notes that EDC has recently contracted an 

additional consultant to provide real estate and relocation services to all the impacted businesses 

of Willet Point upon project approval. 

During the CPC public hearing, the Commission raised questions regarding the feasibility of 

relocating the area’s similar and complementary businesses together in another single location.  

The Commission acknowledges subsequent assurances from EDC that the City will attempt to 

facilitate such a co-relocation effort, should there be businesses that are both interested in and 

have the capacity to co-locate. 

With regard to affordable housing, the Commission recognizes the City’s housing needs extend 

to low, moderate and middle income families and acknowledges the difficulty of finding 

additional opportunities for meeting the future housing needs of the City.  The Commission is 

pleased to note that the Plan builds upon the City’s long-standing commitment to provide 

affordable housing.  Currently, it is projected that 20 percent of the total number of residential 

units, or 1,100 units, would be required to be developed as affordable housing pursuant to the 

terms of a forthcoming RFP.  The Commission further notes correspondence from HPD 

following the public hearing which indicates that the affordable housing will include a broad 

range of low-, moderate and middle-income levels (60% of HUD income index, or $46,080 for a 

family of 4, to 130% of HUD income index, or $99,840 for a family of 4).  The Commission 

encourages HPD to further develop the income mix and continue to explore creative alternatives 

to meet the growing demand for affordable housing at Willets Point and throughout the City. 

The Commission acknowledges testimony raising concerns regarding the project’s traffic 

impacts, the feasibility of the planned highway connections to the Van Wyck Expressway and 

on-site geotechnical constraints.  In response, the Commission acknowledges public hearing 

 39 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
testimony presented by EDC stating that it has worked closely with the Department of 

Transportation (DOT) to ensure that all possible mitigation measures have been explored and 

included in the FGEIS to minimize any potential congestion issues.  In addition, the Commission 

notes that EDC has agreed to the implementation of a detailed traffic monitoring program once 

the project has been built out. 

With regard to questions raised over the feasibility of the proposed new Van Wyck Expressway 

ramps, the Commission notes that the review process for the new ramps is well under way, with 

preliminary review from SDOT and initial data collection completed.  The Commission further 

notes that no new buildings would be allowed to be occupied before the ramps are completed 

without appropriate environmental analyses to confirm that no new significant adverse impacts 

would arise as a result.  

In response to the concern that was raised at the hearing regarding possible contamination into 

the underlying aquifer as a result of using fill to raise the site above the 100-year floodplain, the 

Commission acknowledges public hearing testimony and subsequent correspondence from EDC 

that, based on geotechnical investigations of the area, it is unlikely that the filling of the 

development parcel will have any significant affect on the groundwater table.   The Commission 

further acknowledges assurances from the City’s engineering consultant that migration of 

contaminates through these layers to the aquifer, located 200 feet below the surface, is 

considered highly unlikely. 

The Commission appreciates the outreach and coordination that has been conducted so far by the 

project’s applicants in developing the project, and it urges these agencies to continue their 

collaborative efforts as the project is implemented.  In particular, the Commission acknowledges 

the time and effort that Community Board 7 has spent in its review of the project during many 

public meetings it conducted since referral and certification.   

 40 

C 080382 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Urban Renewal Plan and the Disposition of City-Owned Property 

The Commission believes that the objectives of the Plan cannot be realized absent assemblage of 

property and redevelopment pursuant to disposition under the URP.  The Commission 

understands that ongoing negotiations with affected businesses may facilitate such assemblages 

without use of eminent domain and expresses its hope that EDC and private property owners in 

the area will reach agreement concerning these matters.  At the same time, the Commission 

believes that, should the City determine, following extensive efforts at negotiated resolution, to 

exercise eminent domain under the URP, doing so would serve a public purpose in allowing for 

realization of the public benefits of the Plan. 

In response to Community Board 7’s recommendations, the Commission is approving the URP 

with the modification that a public school containing a minimum of 650 seats would be required 

to meet the needs of the new residential population.  The design of the school will be subject to 

review and approval by the School Construction Authority and the Department of Education. 

Amendment to the City Map 

The Commission understands that demapping all public streets within the Special District is 

necessary for providing suitable site plan flexibility for the development of the project.  The 

Commission believes that the proposed street layouts and streetscape design elements required 

and provided for in the Special District will ensure that the Plan meets its objective of integrating 

the new development within a well-designed circulation network that addresses the multiple 

needs of pedestrians, bicycles, and vehicles. 

The Commission notes that an interagency conference was held on January 25, 2008 and no 

objection was raised from any of the city agencies concerning this proposed action.     

RESOLUTION 

