  
On March 4, 2009 (Cal. No. 5), the Commission scheduled March 18, 2009 for a public hearing.  

The hearing was duly held on March 18, 2009 (Calendar No. 23), in conjunction with the hearing 

for the related action (N 090282 ZRY).  There were seven speakers in favor of the application and 

none in opposition. 

Those speaking in favor of the application included the City Councilmember from the 19th 

District, members of Queens Community Boards 7 and 11, and several neighborhood residents, 

including representatives of the North Flushing Civic Association, the Broadway-Flushing 

Homeowners Association and the Auburndale Homeowners Improvement Association.  
The City Councilmember from the 19th District indicated the broad support for both the proposed 

zoning map changes and the proposed R1-2A district.  The Councilmember explained that the 

rezoning proposal would aid in the preservation of the area’s unique character by curbing 

overdevelopment.    

The President of the North Flushing Civic Association,  the First Vice-President of the 

Auburndale Homeowners Improvement Association and a planning consultant testified in support 

of the rezoning, indicating that the lower density and contextual zones will help protect their 

community and ensure that future development reflects the traditional building patterns of the 

area.   

Two members of the Broadway-Flushing Homeowners Association testified in support of the 

proposed R1-2A district for this area.  The speakers indicated that the firm height and bulk 

regulations of the R1-2A district were necessary to preserve their neighborhood’s character by 

discouraging the practice of tearing down of sound single-family houses and developing much 

larger houses in their place. 

The President of the Douglaston Civic Association explained that while he did not live in the 

affected area, he was in support of the proposal.  The speaker expressed the need for the proposed 

 21                                                                                                                  C 090821 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
  
R1-2A district to be applied in other areas of the city and asked the Commission to consider 

rezoning areas of Douglaston from R1-2 to R1-2A. 

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map, in conjunction with the 

amendment to the Zoning Resolution is appropriate.   

The Commission believes that this action represents a comprehensive rezoning strategy for the 

neighborhoods of North Flushing, Broadway-Flushing, Bowne Park, Auburndale and Bayside.  

The Commission recognizes that the current mismatch between the built character of many parts 

of North Flushing and the housing type and density permitted by the existing zoning has 

increasingly resulted in tear downs of existing houses and the construction of out-of-character 

semi-detached, attached, and multi-family buildings.  The Commission notes that while the 

existing R1-2 and R2 districts in the area only allow single-family detached houses, floor area 

exemptions and flexible building height regulations have permitted the construction of much 

taller single-family detached buildings.   

The Commission believes that changing the existing zoning to a fine-grained mix of R1-2A, R2A, 

R2, R3X, R3-1, R3-2, R4, R4A, R4-1, R4B, R5B and R5D districts will more closely match the 

predominant one- and two-family context of the area, as well as ensure future development is 

more consistent with established patterns of scale and density.    

In addition, the Commission believes that the proposed revisions to existing commercial overlays 

more closely reflects the locations of existing commercial development, and will prevent the 

expansion of potentially incompatible commercial uses onto residential side streets. 

The Commission believes that the proposed new R1-2A, district with its height maximums and 

limited floor area exemptions, would provide an additional tool to protect the character of certain 

 22                                                                                                                  C 090821 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
areas developed with detached single-family houses on larger lots.  The Commission believes the 

creation of the new R1-2A zoning district will help protect the predominant built scale and 

character of the 24 blocks in Broadway-Flushing currently zoned R1-2.  The Commission notes 

that the R1-2 district’s floor area exemptions and sky exposure plane regulations allow new 

houses that would be out-of-scale with neighboring buildings.  The new R1-2A district would 

permit the same single-family detached housing types as the R1-2 district, but the R1-2A 

would better reflect the particular height and bulk characteristics of the area by revising the floor 

area exemptions and establishing firm regulations for building perimeter wall and roof heights.  

The Commission notes that this new city-wide district can be used in other areas, and has already 

been proposed by the Department in an application (C 090283 ZMQ) for rezoning the 32 blocks 

in Cord Meyer/Forest Hills area in Queens.  

RESOLUTION 

