 

On December 3, 2008 (Calendar No. 6), the City Planning Commission scheduled 

December 17, 2008 for a public hearing on the application (N 090103 ZRQ). The hearing 

was duly held on December 17, 2008 (Calendar No. 28), in conjunction with the hearing 

for the related action (C 090104 ZMQ).   There were three speakers in favor and four 

speakers in opposition.  

The president of the Forest Hills Community & Civic Association spoke in favor of the 

proposal. She stated that the proposal would protect the scale and character of Austin 

Street and preclude more dense developments that have been approved through the Board 

of Standards and Appeal (BSA).  A board member of the Forest Hills Community & 

Civic Association appeared in favor and said that the proposal would preserve 

neighborhood character and maintain the pedestrian experience on Austin Street by 

providing fixed height limits and implementing glazing requirements for ground floor 

commercial. An architect representing a property owner in the rezoning area located at 

68-60 Austin Street, stated they had received a special permit from the Board of 

Standards and Appeals to waive the parking requirement for an expansion of an existing 

building on the site.  He indicated that if the zoning proposal were approved, the special 

12

N 090103 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
permit would be invalidated and asked the Commission to modify the zoning text so the 

special permit could remain in effect. 

A board member of the Forest Hills Van Court Association spoke in opposition and 

stated that the proposal would subvert the character of Austin Street, destroy the present 

balance and lead to overdevelopment.  An attorney speaking in opposition on behalf of a 

member of the Friends of Station Square stated that the proposal lacked balance and 

favored large scale development. An attorney representing the Forest Hills Van Court 

Association opposed the application, stating that the proposal would significantly alter 

existing neighborhood character and suggested an alternative zoning proposal be 

considered that would limit the height of all buildings in the Special District to 70 feet 

and have a maximum FAR of 4.0.  He also suggested that components of the Little Italy 

and Madison Avenue special districts may be appropriate for this proposal.  A planning 

consultant representing the Forest Hills Van Court Association, also in opposition, stated 

that the proposal does not address the preservation of the character of Austin Street.  He 

also stated that the Environmental Assessment Statement was deficient in addressing the 

impact categories of Neighborhood Character, Urban Design and Shadows.  

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed.  

13

N 090103 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONSIDERATION 

The City Planning Commission believes that the proposed zoning text amendment to  

(N  090103  ZRQ)  as  modified  herein,  in  conjunction  with  the  proposed  zoning  map 

amendment (C 090103 ZMQ) is appropriate. The zoning changes would replace outdated 

zoning designations that are not reflective of current land use and development trends in 

the  area.  The  proposal  reinforces  established  contexts,  provides  transition  in  scale  from 

south  to  north  and  continues  to  promote  established  ground  floor  retail/commercial 

development.   

The  Commission  believes  the  proposed  Special  District  text  and  corresponding  zoning 

map  amendments  provide  bulk,  density  and  use  regulations  that  are  appropriate  for  the 

area.  This  proposal  is  the  result  of  more  than  two  years  of  meetings  with  Community 

Board  6,  elected  officials  and  property  owners.    The  proposal  reflects  the  stakeholders 

input and addresses concerns that were raised during its development.  The proposed text  

includes provisions to allow development that is appropriate but predictable in terms of 

bulk and density, as well as parking provisions to provide for adequate off-street parking.  

The proposal prohibits new uses that are not compatible with existing land use patterns in 

the area but allows uses that support the regional commercial character of the area. 

The Commission acknowledges the recommendation of Community Board 6 to increase 

the accessory residential parking requirement from 50% to 70% in the proposed C4-4A 

14

N 090103 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
and  C4-5X  zoning  districts  and  retain  a  supermarket  at  Gerard  Place  and  Yellowstone 

Boulevard.    The  Commission  notes  that  both  requests  are  beyond  the  scope  of  the 

proposal  and  believes  that  the  proposed  parking  regulations  are  appropriate  for  an  area 

that is well served by mass transit. 

The Commission acknowledges that comments were made by some community 

members during the public review that the proposal will alter the character of the 

neighborhood and lead to overdevelopment. The Commission believes that the fixed 

base heights and maximum building heights will provide the framework to allow the 

area to grow in an orderly and predictable manner and prevent out of character 

development.  The Commission also notes that the maximum proposed height limit of 

150 feet in the proposed C4-5X is significantly less than the tallest structure in the 

rezoning area which is over 200 feet in height. 

The Commission also believes that the proposal is protective of existing neighborhood 

character.  The proposed building envelopes reflect the existing building heights..  The 

zoning text also provides additional controls that address the unique character of the 

area.  The rear yard regulations for properties in the proposed R5D abutting the Long 

Island Railroad right of way reflect the uniqueness of those lots.  The base height of 40-

60 feet for properties west of 70th Road in the proposed C4-5X zoning district minimizes 

shadow impacts on Gerald MacDonald Park, and all zoning lots in the C4-5X zoning 

15

N 090103 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
district will have frontage upon Queens Boulevard. The maximum building height of 

150 feet allows for the lower base height and accommodates commercial and office 

development, which typically requires higher floor-to-ceiling heights.  In addition, the 

permitted uses, as well as the ground floor glazing requirement reinforce the regional 

commercial character of the area. The Commission believes these  key elements of the 

existing neighborhood character will be preserved by the proposal. 

The Commission also notes that the suggestion for a lesser density alternative rezoning 

proposal is outside of the scope of this application. 

In response to testimony at the Commission’s public hearing relating to a special permit 

approved by the Board  of Standards and Appeals for property located at 68-60 Austin, 

the Commission is modifying  the text of the proposed Special District to allow the 

special permit to remain in effect if the proposal is adopted.  

The Commission believes that with the changes described herein, the Special Forest Hills 

District provides the appropriate updates to the 1961 zoning designations by reinforcing 

the  existing  built  character,  promoting  ground  floor  commercial  development  and 

providing the framework for predictable and orderly growth in the future.   

16

N 090103 ZRQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESOLUTION 

