 

On June 3, 2009 (Calendar No. 1), the City Planning Commission scheduled June 17, 2009 for a 

public hearing on this application (C 090382 ZMQ). The hearing was duly held on June 17, 2009 

(Calendar No. 29). There were two speakers in favor of the application and none in opposition. 

The Council Member for 30th City Council District spoke in favor of the proposed rezoning. She 

described how the proposed rezoning would preserve the  lower density residential character of 

the  neighborhoods  and  prevent  additional  strain  on  local  infrastructure  resulting  from  out-of-

character higher density residential development. 

The District Manager for Community District 5 explained that the proposed rezoning was very 

large  and  complicated  and  that  it  had  been  finely  crafted  to  address  the  concerns  of  the 

communities. 

There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The  Commission  believes  that  this  application  (C  090382  ZMQ)  for  an  amendment  of  the 

Zoning Map is appropriate. 

The Commission believes that this action represents a comprehensive rezoning strategy for the 

neighborhoods of Middle Village, Glendale and Maspeth. The Commission recognizes that the 

current  mismatch  between  the  built  character  of  many  parts  of  the  Middle  Village-Glendale-

Maspeth area and the housing type and density permitted by the existing zoning has increasingly 

resulted  in tear downs of existing  houses and  the  construction  of  out-of-character  attached and 

multi-family buildings.  

31 

    C 090382 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
The Commission believes that changing the existing zoning to a fine-grained mix of R3A, R4A, 

R4B, R4-1, R5B and R5D districts will more closely match the predominant one- and two-family 

context  of  the  area,  as  well  as  ensure  future  development  is  more  consistent  with  established 

patterns of scale and density.  

In addition, the Commission believes that the proposed revisions to existing commercial overlays 

and  the  proposed  new  overlay  locations  will  more  closely  reflect  locations  of  existing 

commercial  development,  support  additional  commercial  opportunities  along  shopping  streets 

and  prevent  the  expansion  of  potentially  incompatible  commercial  uses  onto  residential  side 

streets. 

RESOLUTION  

