  

On April 1, 2009 (Cal. No. 3), the Commission scheduled April 22, 2009 for a public hearing.  

The hearing was duly held on April 22, 2009 (Calendar No. 29). There were seventeen speakers 

in favor of the application and two in opposition. 

Those speaking in favor of the application included the District Manager of Community Board 6, 

a Vice-President of the Queens Civic Congress and several neighborhood residents, including 

members of the Association of Old Forest Hills and the Forest Hills Co-op Council. 

A Vice-President of the Queens Civic Congress spoke in favor of the rezoning, indicating the 

widespread support for protecting the low-density character of many neighborhoods in Queens 

4                                                                                                       

C 090283 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
and the value of the R1-2A contextual zone in preserving the low-scale one-family fabric of Cord 

Meyer and other neighborhoods in Queens.  

The President of the Association of Old Forest Hills testified in support of the proposal, stating 

that although the civic association had sought even tighter regulations in terms of building 

heights, they believe the rezoning would provide a more consistent scale for new houses in the 

neighborhood and that the proposed R1-2A district is an appropriate compromise. Two other 

members of the Association of Old Forest Hills also testified in support of the rezoning, stating 

that the proposal is fair. 

The District Manager of Community Board 6 stated that the board voted in favor of the proposal. 

He also stated that outreach efforts were made and public meetings were held to inform 

neighborhood residents about the proposal.  

A member of the Forest Hills Co-op Council testified in favor of the proposal, stating that the 

proposed district is a modest change and would help to regulate the scale of new development. 

Ten other residents of the area also spoke in favor of the proposal.  

Two residents testified in opposition to the proposal, stating that property values would decrease 

and more public outreach was needed.  

There were no other speakers and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this amendment of the Zoning Map is appropriate. 

5                                                                                                       

C 090283 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Commission believes that this action represents a contextual rezoning strategy for the Cord 

Meyer neighborhood. The Commission recognizes that the current mismatch between the built 

character of Cord Meyer and the housing bulk permitted by the existing zoning has increasingly 

resulted in tear downs of existing houses and the construction of out-of-character buildings. The 

Commission notes that while the existing R1-2 district in the area only allows single-family 

detached houses, floor area exemptions and absence of building height regulations have permitted 

the construction of much taller single-family detached buildings. 

The Commission believes that the new R1-2A district, with its height maximums and limited 

floor area exemptions, would protect the predominant built scale and character of the rezoning 

area. The Commission notes that the R1-2 district’s floor area exemptions and sky exposure plane 

regulations allow new houses that would be out-of-scale with neighboring buildings. The new 

R1-2A district would permit the same single-family detached housing types as the R1-2 

district, but the R1-2A would better reflect the particular height and bulk characteristics of the 

area by revising floor area exemptions and establishing firm regulations for perimeter wall and 

building heights.  

The Commission believes that changing the existing zoning to a R1-2A district will more closely 

match the predominant one-family context of the area, as well as ensure future development is 

more consistent with established patterns of scale. The Commission notes that the R1-2A 

maximum lot coverage of 30 percent would enhance flexibility for new development and 

renovations but provide greater overall predictability in future residential building envelopes. The 

Commission notes that the proposal had extensive review at the community board and 

participation from local civic associations. 

6                                                                                                       

C 090283 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
RESOLUTION 

