 

On March 22, 2010 (Calendar No. 1), the City Planning Commission scheduled March 24, 2010 

for a public hearing on this application (C 100199 ZMQ). The hearing was duly held on March 

24, 2010 (Calendar No. 10), in conjunction with the hearing for the related action. There were  

ten speakers in favor and none opposed.  

Speakers in favor of the application included a representative of the City Councilmember from 

District 22 and several neighborhood residents. The Councilmember representative noted that the 

proposal was a comprehensive rezoning strategy that balanced positive growth and neighborhood 

preservation. Several speakers noted erosion of neighborhood character and strain on area 

infrastructure and services created by current development trends and they urged the 

Commission to quickly adopt the proposed zoning. One of the speakers was a representative of 

the owner of the property at 35-10 Astoria Boulevard South, who generally supported the 

rezoning proposal but requested the extension of the proposed C4-3 district to include his client’s 

property.  

Two speakers represented the Hellenic-American Neighborhood Action Committee (HANAC), 

Inc., a local developer of affordable housing. The speakers noted that HANAC generally 

supported the rezoning proposal. However, the speakers also explained that, under the proposed 

zoning, HANAC would be unable to build a proposed senior residence at 31-30, 31-34, and 31-
40 33rd Street. While the project was designed to comply with the existing R6 district, the 

proposed R6B district would limit the potential number of residential units on the site to such a 

level as to make the project unfeasible.  

Waterfront Revitalization Program Consistency Review 

This application, in conjunction with the application for the related action, was reviewed by the 

Department of City Planning for consistency with the policies of the New York City Waterfront 

Revitalization Program (WRP), as amended, approved by the New York City Council on 

October 13, 1999 and by the New York State Department of State on May 28, 2002, pursuant to 

31 

C 100199 ZMQ 

 
 
the New York State Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of 1981 (New York 

State Executive Law, Section 910 et. seq.). The designated WRP number is 09-082.  

This action was determined to be consistent with the policies of the New York City Waterfront 

Revitalization Program. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this application to amend the Zoning Map (C 100199 ZMQ), as 

modified herein, along with the related application for a zoning text amendment (N 100200 

ZRQ) is appropriate. 

The Commission notes that the rezoning proposal was developed in response to the concerns of 

Community Board 1, the local City Councilmember and various local resident and community 

groups about new development in the area that was inconsistent with the exiting built 

neighborhood character. The proposal was refined over the last two years by the Department of 

City Planning through an extensive public outreach process and in close collaboration with 

Community Board 1. 

The Commission notes that much of the existing zoning in Astoria is unchanged since 1961. The 

existing zoning has increasingly resulted in the recent construction of several out-of-scale 

buildings that contrast sharply with surrounding development patterns. The existing R5 district 

does not closely reflect some of the important characteristics of existing development, especially 

on blocks where building heights and yard depths are highly consistent for the length of the 

block. The existing R6 district has no firm height limit and the maximum allowable FAR varies 

substantially between residential and community facility uses.  

The Commission believes that the proposed R4, R4-1, R4B, R5, R5B, R5D, R6A and R6B lower 

density and contextual residential zoning designations more closely correspond to the existing 

building patterns found within Astoria.  The Commission also believes that the proposed R7A, 

C4-2A, C4-3 and C4-4A districts will provide a moderate increase in development potential to 

direct growth to locations along wide streets and close to mass transit.  

32 

C 100199 ZMQ 

 
 
The Commission notes that the related zoning text amendment (N 100200 ZRQ) would make the 

proposed R7A and C4-4A districts eligible for the Inclusionary Housing Program, within which 

FAR bonuses would be available to encourage the development of affordable housing. The 

Commission believes that providing such incentives for affordable housing will appropriately 

expand the City’s commitment to provide affordable housing in an area where city-owned land is 

scarce.  The Commission notes that developments using the Inclusionary Housing Program 

would maintain height limits for the new contextual districts while receiving a floor area bonus 

of up to 33 percent in exchange for providing 20 percent of the total units to households eligible 

under affordable housing criteria.  

In response to the Borough President’s condition and the testimony received at its public hearing, 

the Commission notes that the requested extension of the proposed C4-3 district to include the 

property at 35-10 Astoria Boulevard South is beyond the scope of its purview.  

In response to concerns raised by representatives of HANAC regarding the proposed change 
from R6 zoning to R6B, a lower density contextual zone, for property at 31-30/40 33rd Street, the 

Commission notes that HANAC has been engaged with the design and arrangement of financing 

for its planned affordable senior residence at this site since 2006 and that demolition of former 

structures on the site is complete. The Commission also notes that the proposed senior residence 

will contain sixty-six affordable housing units for the elderly. Furthermore, the proposed senior 

residence has a planned height of 56 feet, which is comparable to the height of nearby six-story 
buildings fronting 32nd Street on the western portion of this block. Given the extensive amount of 

time and resources that have already been committed to the HANAC senior residence project and 
the scale of nearby six-story buildings along the mid-block portion of 32nd Street, the 

Commission hereby modifies the rezoning proposal to retain existing R6 zoning on the site of the 

proposed HANAC senior residence, in addition to adjacent portions of the mid-block between 
33rd and 32nd Streets. This modification shall not affect the R6A district proposed to be mapped 
within 100 feet of 31st Avenue.  

The Commission believes the proposed actions represent a comprehensive rezoning strategy 

which would preserve the existing scale of the Astoria neighborhood by generally limiting the 

height of new development, while also creating incentives for affordable housing through the 

33 

C 100199 ZMQ 

 
 
Inclusionary Housing Program along certain major corridors. In addition, the proposed actions 

would support local retail corridors while protecting the character of residential side streets. 

RESOLUTION 

