 

On July 28, 2010 (Calendar No. 11), the City Planning Commission scheduled August 11, 2010 

for a public hearing on this application (C 100409 ZMQ). The hearing was duly held on August 

11, 2010 (Calendar No. 22). There were 14 speakers in favor of the application and 26 speakers 

in opposition.  

25 

C 100409 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Speakers in favor of the application included the City Councilmember from District 19, the First 

Vice-President of the Auburndale Improvement Association, a member from the Oakland 

Garden Terrace Community Council and the Board President of the Windsor Park Apartments. 

In addition, several speakers from Oakland Gardens spoke in favor of the two proposed R2A 

districts in the eastern portion of the rezoning area near Alley Pond Park and in favor of the 

proposed R5D located at the Windsor Park Apartments. 

The Councilmember noted that the proposed rezoning was a beneficial and comprehensive 

contextual strategy that preserves the established low density of one- and two-family homes in 

Auburndale, Oakland Gardens and Hollis Hills. The Councilmember noted that the existing M1-

1 district along Station Road in Auburndale should be rezoned contextually to match the 

residential districts that abut the M1-1 district. The First Vice-President of the Auburndale 

Improvement Association thanked the Commission and Department for their efforts in 

preserving these areas in northeastern Queens. In addition, the speaker voiced concern over the 

M1-1 district along Station Road in Auburndale and requested the Commission pursue the 

creation of a new zoning designation for single-family rowhouses. A member from the Oakland 

Garden Terrace Community Council noted erosion of neighborhood character and strain on area 

infrastructure and services created by recent development trends and urged the Commission to 

quickly adopt the proposed zoning. The speaker along with six other speakers supported the 

proposed two R2A districts near Alley Pond Park in Oakland Gardens. 

Four speakers spoke in support of the proposed R5D district along Bell Boulevard and 73rd 

Avenue in the Windsor Park area of Oakland Gardens including the Board President, the 

architect, a board member and shareholder of Windsor Park Apartments. The President of 

Windsor Park Board of Directors testified that the proposed rezoning would facilitate the 

development of 72 additional residential units clustered on two locations on the site. The sale of 

the proposed new residential units would allow the coop board to increase its reserve funds to 

make necessary capital improvements on the site, currently developed with 20 elevator 

apartment buildings with a total of 1,828 dwelling units. 

26 

C 100409 ZMQ 

 
 
 
19 speakers were opposed to the two proposed R2A districts near Alley Pond Park in Oakland 

Gardens. Two speakers noted that a petition in favor of an R3X designation with 152 signatures 

from residents living in the affected area was submitted to the Queens Borough President. The 

speakers noted that R2A would be highly restrictive and that an R3X designation would preserve 

the detached character of one- and two-family houses in the neighborhood area, while preventing 

the development of out-of-character semi-detached housing. Other speakers noted that there was 

adequate on-street parking in the neighborhood, available space for new students at Public 

School 213 and sufficient infrastructure and services.  

There were five speakers opposed to the proposed R5D zoning for the Windsor Park Apartment 

complex that would allow the development of 72 housing units in three-story rowhouses 

clustered in two locations on the site. Several speakers were concerned that the new development 

would adversely affect the availability of parking for current residents. One speaker noted that 

the new development would adversely affect the open space existing on the site. 

A member of the Station Road Civic Association opposed the rezoning and expressed her 

concern that the M1-1 district along Station Road in Auburndale needs to be residentially 

rezoned in order to promote development compatible with surrounding residences. A 

representative from an automotive repair business located in the M1-1 district testified that they 

have and will continue to work with the local community to resolve any concerns, such as the 

exiting procedures and signaling system for the curb cut located at Station Road and Auburndale 

Lane. 

There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this application to amend the Zoning Map (C 100409 ZMQ), as 

modified herein is appropriate. 

27 

C 100409 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The Commission notes that the rezoning proposal was developed in response to the concerns of 

Community Boards 7 and 11, local City Council members, local civic groups and area residents 

regarding new development that was inconsistent with existing built neighborhood character. 

The proposal was refined over the last two years by the Department of City Planning through an 

extensive public outreach process and in close collaboration with Community Boards 7 and 11, 

local City Council members and local civic groups from the Auburndale, Oakland Gardens and 

Hollis Hills area. 

The Commission notes that the existing zoning in Auburndale, Oakland Gardens and Hollis Hills 

has remained unchanged since 1961. The existing zoning has recently resulted in the 

construction of several out-of-context buildings that contrast sharply with surrounding 

development patterns. The existing zoning districts do not closely reflect some of the important 

characteristics of existing development, especially in R3-2 districts where one- and two-family 

detached homes are allowed to be replaced with multi-family buildings or semi-detached and 

attached structures. 

The Commission believes that the proposed lower density and contextual residential zoning 

designations more closely correspond to the existing building patterns found throughout 

Auburndale, Oakland Gardens and Hollis Hills. The Commission also notes that the proposed 

R2A and R3X will preserve and reinforce the established pattern of one- and two-family 

detached houses found in Auburndale, Oakland Gardens and Hollis Hills. The Commission 

further notes that the proposed R3-1 and R4-1 districts reflect the one- and two-family, semi-

detached structures that predominate in these areas. The Commission also believes that the 

limited density increase provided by the R5D district to be mapped at Springfield Boulevard and 

Union Turnpike will more closely match the existing building pattern of elevator apartments in 

this area and provide appropriate opportunities for new residential development along these two 

major thoroughfares. The Commission also believes that modifications to several of the existing 

commercial overlays will prevent commercial encroachment onto primarily residential blocks. 

In response to the Borough President’s condition and the testimony received at the Planning 

Commission’s public hearing, the Commission notes that it has reviewed and reconsidered the 

28 

C 100409 ZMQ 

 
 
 
two R2A districts proposed near Alley Pond Park in Oakland Gardens. The Commission believes 

that a R3X district would better match the predominant detached one- and two-family housing 

types found in the area. The Commission notes the R3X district will prevent out-of-context 

developments, such as semi-detached structures. In addition, the Commission notes that the 

conformance rate for the area will increase from 67 percent to 97 percent with an R3X 

designation that allows one- and two-family detached buildings. Therefore, the Commission 

hereby modifies the rezoning proposal to change the two proposed R2A areas near Alley Pond 

Park in Oakland Gardens to R3X. 

In response to the concerns raised by several residents of the Windsor Park Apartments regarding 

the effects of the proposed two clusters of  new three-story rowhouses containing 72 new 

dwelling units, the Commission believes that additional outreach to the affected residents is 

needed to ensure that their concerns can be addressed as much as possible.  Also, the 

Commission notes that the development was only schematically designed and further work is 

needed to ensure that the buildings will attractively enhance their setting within the Windsor 

Park campus. The Commission hereby modifies the rezoning proposal to retain the existing R4 

zoning where R5D had been proposed for vicinity of the Windsor Park Apartments. 

The Commission acknowledges Community Board 11’s recommendation for a new zoning 

designation for single-family attached rowhouses citywide. The Commission recognizes, 

however, that the current application is only for a Zoning Map amendment, and it notes that 

changes to the text of the Zoning Resolution are beyond the scope of the current application. The 

Commission notes that current zoning regulations generally curb the conversion of single-family 

attached houses to two-family occupancy in lower density districts, including the R3-2 districts 

that will remain in Auburndale. It further notes that the recently adopted Residential Streetscape 

Text strengthened these restrictions by requiring any new units created in these single-family 

attached houses to provide an additional off-street parking space for each additional unit. Such 

new off-street parking spaces may occupy no more than 50 percent of the lot area not covered by 

buildings containing residences. Therefore, the Commission believes that the Department of City 

29 

C 100409 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
Planning should monitor the effectiveness of these new regulations to see if it can be determined 

whether there is a need for a single-family row house district. 

In response to Community Board 11’s second condition, the Commission notes that the request 

for the M1-1 district in Auburndale’s Station Road area to be residentially rezoned  would affect 

an area outside of the current zoning proposal, and it is, therefore, beyond the scope of this 

application. The Commission further notes that the M1-1 district contains active commercial 

uses that have experienced a significant growth in employment over the last decade. The 

Commission notes that the Department of City Planning has studied the M1-1 district as 

requested by the local Councilmember and has discussed the findings of its study with the local 

Councilmember as described below. 

The Commission acknowledges Community Board 7’s, recommendation regarding increased 

enforcement by City agencies that regulate the M1-1 district in the Station Road Area of 

Auburndale.  While the Commission recognizes that the application is for a Zoning Map 

amendment which does not influence the City’s enforcement procedures, the Commission is 

pleased to note that the Department of City Planning, with the assistance of the Department of 

Buildings, the Department of Transportation and the Department of Environmental Protection 

has and will continue to work with the local civic associations to address any zoning 

enforcement issue that is brought to its attention.  

In response to concerns raised by the Councilmember from the 19th District regarding the M1-1 

district in the Station Road area of Auburndale, the Commission notes that the M1-1 district is 

adjacent to an R2 district along Station Road and Auburndale Lane. The Commission also notes 

that there are 11 other locations throughout the Borough of Queens where R2 districts share a 

common zoning boundary line with other manufacturing districts. Furthermore, the Commission 

reports that M1-1 and C8-1 districts in the Station Road area have experienced no extended 

vacancies during the past decade. Rather, there has been substantial investment and development 

on a number of properties.  This development activity has led to an expanding job base, 

dramatically increasing area employment by more than 600 percent for the period of 2002-2008.  

30 

C 100409 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, the Commission does not have at this time a sound planning basis for rezoning the 

area’s M1-1 designation with a residential district which would put existing uses out of 

compliance. The Commission believes that only viable rezoning option for the M1-1 district at 

this time is a C8-1 commercial zoning district, which would allow the existing uses to remain 

compliant with zoning, while precluding future use of the area for manufacturing use. The 

Commission asks the Department of City Planning to work with the local Councilmember to 

determine whether there is a consensus for commercially rezoning this area.  

The Commission believes the proposed actions represent a comprehensive rezoning strategy for 

the Auburndale, Oakland Gardens and Hollis Hills neighborhoods in northeast Queens that will 

broadly protect their existing lower density character by more closely reflecting  one- and two- 

family building patterns, and preventing commercial intrusion onto residential blocks. 

RESOLUTION 

