  

On May 11, 2011 (Calendar No. 3), the City Planning Commission scheduled May 25, 2011 for 

a public hearing on this application (C 110207 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on May 25, 

2011 (Calendar No. 16) in conjunction with the public hearings on the applications for the 

related actions (N 110208 ZRQ and N 110209 ZRQ) 

There were two speakers in favor and none opposed. 

The first speaker, the Chair of Community District 2, noted that the rezoning proposal has 

responded to the community’s desire to prevent out-of-character buildings in Sunnyside and 

Woodside and ensure that future development would be compatible with the built character of 

these communities. He also noted the extensive outreach process conducted by the Queens 

Office of the Department of City Planning to achieve community consensus on the rezoning 

proposal.  

The second speaker, a representative from the office of the Queens Borough President, noted the 

Borough President’s support of the rezoning proposal and complimented the Department for 

providing another important zoning update to protect the cherished character of neighborhoods in 

the borough.  

32 

C 110207 ZMQ 

 
 
 
There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this application to amend the Zoning Map (C 110207 ZMQ), in 

conjunction with the related applications for zoning text amendments (N 110208 ZRQ and N 

110209 ZRQ), are appropriate.  

The Commission notes that the rezoning proposal was developed in response to community 

concerns about out-of-character new development. The proposal was refined over the last two 

years by the Department of City Planning through an extensive public outreach process and in 

close collaboration with Community Board 2, area residents and civic groups, and the local City 

Councilmember.  

The Commission notes that much of the existing zoning in Sunnyside and Woodside is 

unchanged since 1961, and that current zoning does not closely reflect some of the important 

characteristics of existing development, especially on blocks where building heights and yard 

depths are highly consistent for the length of the block. The Commission also notes that existing 

R6, R7-1, and C4-2 districts have no firm height limit and the maximum allowable FAR varies 

substantially between residential and community facility uses. The Commission believes that the 

existing underlying zoning designations have resulted in the construction of some buildings that 

are out of character with the existing neighborhood context.  

The Commission believes that the proposed R4, R4-1, R5B, R5D, R6A, and R7A contextual 

zoning designations more closely correspond to the established building patterns found within 

Sunnyside and Woodside, and they will ensure that future development will reinforce the built 

fabric that defines the character on blocks within these neighborhoods. The Commission also 

believes that the proposed R7X and C4-5X districts along Queens Boulevard will provide a 

moderate increase in development potential to direct growth to locations along a very wide street 

and close to mass transit.   

The Commission believes that the proposed C1-3 and C1-4 commercial overlays along the area’s 

shopping streets will support existing retail and services as well as provide additional 

33 

C 110207 ZMQ 

 
 
 
commercial opportunities, while the reduction in overlay depths from 150 feet to 100 feet will 

prevent the intrusion of commercial uses onto residential streets.  . 

The Commission notes that the related zoning text amendment (N 110208 ZRQ) would make the 

proposed R7X and C4-5X districts eligible for the Inclusionary Housing Program to provide 

floor area bonuses that would encourage the development of permanently affordable housing. 

The Commission believes that providing such incentives for affordable housing will 

appropriately expand the City’s commitment to provide affordable housing in an area where city-

owned land is scarce. The Commission notes that developments using the Inclusionary Housing 

Program would maintain height limits for the new contextual districts while receiving a floor 

area bonus of 33 percent in exchange for providing 20 percent of floor area to households 

eligible under affordable housing criteria.  

The Commission notes that the related zoning text amendment (N 110209 ZRQ) to allow small 

sidewalk cafes responds to distinct characteristics of sections of Queens Boulevard and Skillman 

Avenue.  The Commission believes that the proposed text change will provide appropriate 

opportunities for sidewalk cafes to enliven these shopping streets while ensuring adequate 

pedestrian circulation space. 

The Commission believes the proposed actions represent a comprehensive rezoning strategy 

which would protect and reinforce the existing scale of the Sunnyside and Woodside 

neighborhoods by generally limiting the height of new development, while also providing 

incentives for the creation of affordable housing through the Inclusionary Housing Program 

along Queens Boulevard, a wide street well-served by transit. In addition, the proposed actions 

would support local retail corridors while protecting the character of residential side streets.  

RESOLUTION 

