

On April 11, 2012 (Calendar No. 1), the City Planning Commission scheduled April 25, 2012 for 

a public hearing on this application (C 120195 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on  April 25,

2012 (Calendar No. 13).  There were no speakers, and the hearing was closed.

CONSIDERATION

The  Commission  believes  that  this  application  to  amend  the  Zoning  Map  (C  120195 ZMQ)  is 

appropriate.

21

C 120195 ZMQ

 
The  Commission  notes  that  the  rezoning  proposal  is  consistent  with  the  Department  of  City 

Planning’s efforts to update zoning in areas where it has not changed in over 50 years.  Existing 

zoning  in  Woodhaven  and  Richmond  Hill  has  remained  unchanged  since  1961  and  has 

increasingly resulted in tear downs of existing one- and two-family wood-frame houses and their 

replacement with out-of-character semi-detached, attached, and multi-family buildings.

The  Commission  notes  that  the  proposal,  which  was  developed  in  response  to  community 

concerns about recent  out-of-character development,  was refined over the  last  two  years by the 

Department  of  City  Planning  through  an  extensive  public  outreach  process  and  in  close 

collaboration with Community Board 9, area residents and civic groups, and local City Council 

members.

The Commission believes that the proposed R3A, R3X, R4A, R4-1, and R4B  contextual zoning 

districts will more closely match one- and two-family residential building patterns found among 

Woodhaven  and  Richmond  Hill’s  residential  blocks,  and  that  these  zoning  changes  will  ensure 

future  development  will  reinforce  surrounding  residential  contexts.  The  Commission  also 

believes the proposed rezoning of portions of Jamaica and Atlantic Avenues to R6A districts will 

provide  a  moderate  increase  in  development  potential  where  it  can  support  and  strengthen 

already established mixed-use areas along wider streets and locations near mass transit resources.  

The  Commission  believes  that  the  C1-4,  C2-3,  and  C2-4  commercial  overlays  proposed  along 

the  area’s  major  corridors  will  support  existing  retail  and  service  uses,  while  the  reduction  in 

overlay  depths  from  150  feet  to  100  feet  will  prevent  the  intrusion  of  commercial  uses  onto 

residential streets.

The Commission notes that new commercial overlays are proposed to be mapped along portions 

of  Lefferts  Boulevard  and  Atlantic  Avenue  where  non-conforming commercial  uses  currently 

operate. The  Commission  believes that  these  new  C2-3  overlays  will  bring  these  lots  into 

conformance and allow future business location opportunities.

22

C 120195 ZMQ

 
The Commission  notes that  written  testimony  submitted  by the Executive  Director  of the Great 

Woodhaven  Development  Corporation, in  support  of  application,  notes  the  carefully  crafted 

balance of the proposed rezoning.

The Commission believes that the proposed rezoning represents a comprehensive zoning strategy 

that  will  reinforce  the  one- and  two-family  residential  character  of  Woodhaven  and  Richmond 

Hill  while  directing new  mixed-use  development  opportunities  to  two  distinct  commercial 

corridors. The  proposal  will  protect  the  established  residential  contexts of  Woodhaven  and 

Richmond Hill and provide a framework for orderly growth.

RESOLUTION

