 

On August 7, 2013 (Calendar No. 2), the City Planning Commission scheduled August 21, 2013 

for a public hearing on this application (C 130344 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on August 

21, 2013 (Calendar No. 44).   

There were no speakers, and the hearing was closed. 

Waterfront Revitalization Program Consistency Review 

This  application  (C  130344  ZMQ),  was  reviewed  by  the  Department  of  City  Planning  for 

consistency  with  policies  of  the  New  York  Waterfront  Revitalization  Program  (WRP),  as 

amended,  approved  by  the  City  Council  on  October  13,  1999  and  by  the  New  York  State 

Department of State on May 28, 2002, pursuant to the New York State Waterfront Revitalization 

and Coastal Act of 1981 (New York State Executive Law, Section 910 et seq.).  The designated 

WRP number is 13-045. 

The  City  Planning  Commission,  acting  as  the  City  Coastal  Commission,  having  reviewed  the 

waterfront  aspects  of  this  action,  finds  that  the  actions  will  not  substantially  hinder  the 

achievement of any WRP policy and hereby determines that this action is consistent with WRP 

policies. 

CONSIDERATION 

The  Commission  believes  that  this  application  to  amend  the  Zoning  Map  (C  130344  ZMQ)  is 

appropriate. 

20 

C 130344 ZMQ  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Commission believes that this rezoning proposal is consistent with the Department of City 

Planning’s efforts to update zoning in areas where it has not changed in over 50 years, including 

zoning  changes  for  nearby  portions  of  North  Corona  approved 

in  2003  and  2009.   

The Commission notes that zoning in East Elmhurst has not been changed since 1961 which has 

increasingly resulted in demolitions of existing one- and two-family residences to be replaced by 

out-of-character semi-detached, attached, and multi-family buildings. 

The Commission also notes that the proposal, which was developed in response to  community 

concerns about recent out-of-character development, was refined over the last two years by DCP 

through an extensive public outreach process and in close collaboration with Community Board 

3,  area  residents  and  civic  groups,  the  Queens  Borough  President  and  the  local  City  Council 

member.   

The Commission believes that the proposed R2A, R3A, R3X, R3-1 and R4B, contextual zoning 

districts will more closely match one- and two-family residential building patterns found among 

East Elmhurst’s residential blocks, and that these zoning changes will ensure future development 

will reinforce surrounding residential contexts. The Commission believes the proposed rezoning 

of  certain  blocks  from  R3-2  zoning  to  slightly  higher  density  R4-1  and  R4  districts  will  better 

reflect  the  built  floor  area  and  residential  configuration  typically  found  for  buildings  in  these 

locations.  The Commission also believes the proposed R6B district on more than 30 block fronts 

along  Astoria  Boulevard,  in  conjunction  with  C1-3  and  C2-3  updates  to  the  boulevard’s 

commercial overlay districts, will provide a moderate increase in development potential where it 

can  support  and  strengthen  the  neighborhood’s  primary  shopping  street,  which  is  a  wide 

thoroughfare well-served by bus mass transit.   

The  Commission  further  believes  the  other  proposed  C1-3,  C1-4,  C2-3  and  C2-4  commercial 

overlay districts, including overlays along 14 block fronts on the south side of Roosevelt Avenue 
between  Elmhurst  Avenue  and  114th  Street,  will  support  existing  retail  and  service  uses  and 

provide  future  business  location  opportunities,  while  the  reduction  in  overlay  depths  from  150 

feet to 100 feet will prevent the intrusion of commercial uses onto residential streets. 

21 

C 130344 ZMQ  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overall,  the  Commission  believes  the  proposed  rezoning  represents  a  comprehensive  and 

carefully  balanced  planning  strategy  that  will  reinforce  the  one-  and  two-family  residential 

character  of  East  Elmhurst’s  very  appealing  neighborhood  blocks,  while  directing  new  mixed-

use  development  opportunities  to  two  important  commercial  corridors.    This  proposal  will 

protect the established residential contexts of East Elmhurst and provide a framework for more 

orderly and sustainable growth. 

RESOLUTION 

