  

On October 23, 2013 (Calendar No. 7), the City Planning Commission scheduled November 6, 

2013 for a public hearing on this application (C 140079 ZMQ).  The hearing was duly held on 

November 6, 2013 (Calendar No. 31). 

There were two speakers in favor and three opposed. 

41 

C 140079 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The first speaker, the Chair of Community Board 10, stated that the rezoning proposal responds 

to the community’s desire to prevent out-of-character buildings in Ozone Park and ensure that 

future development will be compatible with the built character of these communities. She also 

noted the extensive outreach process conducted by the Queens Office of the Department of City 

Planning to achieve community consensus on the rezoning proposal.  

The second speaker, the Co-Chair of Community Board 9’s Land Use Committee, reiterated the 

testimony provided by the Chair of Community District 10 and thanked the Department for 

providing another important zoning update to protect the character of neighborhoods in the 

borough.  

Two speakers in opposition included an owner of several vacant properties and his legal 

representative, who stated that the proposed R3X district in the Centreville area would be an 

inappropriate reduction in the development potential in the area.  The third speaker in opposition 

was also an owner of a vacant property in the Centreville area who praised the overall rezoning 

effort for Ozone Park but claimed that the proposed R3X would preclude future development 

from occurring on vacant tracts in Centreville. All three speakers in opposition requested that 

existing R4 zoning be retained in the eastern portion of Centreville. 

There were no other speakers, and the hearing was closed. 

CONSIDERATION 

The Commission believes that this application to amend the Zoning Map (C 140079 ZMQ) is 

appropriate. 

The Commission believes that the rezoning proposal is consistent with the Department of City 

Planning’s efforts to update zoning in areas where it has not changed in over 50 years, including 

zoning changes for nearby portions of Woodhaven and Richmond Hill which were approved in 

2012.  Existing zoning in Ozone Park has remained unchanged since 1961 and has increasingly 

resulted in tear downs of existing one- and two-family wood-frame houses and their replacement 

with out-of-character semi-detached, attached, and multi-family buildings. 

42 

C 140079 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
The Commission recognizes that the proposal, which was developed in response to community 

concerns about recent out-of-character development, was refined over the last two years by the 

Department of City Planning through an extensive public outreach process and in close 

collaboration with Community Boards 9 and 10, area residents, civic groups, and local City 

Council members.   

The Commission believes that the proposed R3A, R3X, R4A, R4-1, R4B, and R5B contextual 

zoning districts will more closely match one- and two-family residential building patterns found 

among Ozone Park’s residential blocks, and that these zoning changes will ensure future 

development will reinforce surrounding residential contexts. The Commission also believes the 
proposed rezoning of portions of Cross Bay Boulevard, Rockaway Boulevard, 101st Avenue, and 

Liberty Avenue to R5D, R6B, and R6A districts will provide a moderate increase in 

development potential where it can support and strengthen already established mixed-use areas 

along wider streets and locations near mass transit resources.   

The Commission believes that the C2-3 commercial overlays proposed along the area’s major 

corridors will support existing retail and service uses and provide future business location 

opportunities, while the reduction in overlay depths from 150 feet to 100 feet will prevent the 

intrusion of commercial uses onto residential streets. 

The Commission acknowledges the correspondence received from the Councilmember for 

Council District 28 expressing his strong support for the proposed rezoning.  

The Commission carefully considered the testimony provided by property owners of vacant 

parcels in Centreville regarding their desire to have the existing R4 zoning remain in the eastern 

portion of Centreville. The Commission believes that the proposed R3X district would not 

preclude future development in the area, but instead it would ensure that new development is of 

an appropriate scale and density.  The Commission notes that recent and current development in 

the area has included new detached one- and two-family houses similar to those allowed in R3X 

districts, and it further notes that of the 62 privately-owned vacant parcels in this area, only two 

43 

C 140079 ZMQ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lots would have little or no opportunity for redevelopment owing to their narrow and small 

configurations, as is the case for these two lots currently under the existing R4 zoning.  

Furthermore, the Commission believes the proposed R3X zoning is appropriate due to unique 

factors affecting current and future developments within this part of Centreville, including its 

irregular network of short and narrow one-way streets with limited connections to the 

surrounding street network and extensive on-street parking congestion near the A-train’s 

Aqueduct/North Conduit station. 

The Commission believes that the proposed rezoning represents a comprehensive zoning strategy 

that will reinforce the one- and two-family residential character of Ozone Park while directing 

moderately-scaled new mixed-use development opportunities to the neighborhood’s commercial 

corridors and neighborhood shopping streets.  This proposal will protect the established 

residential contexts of Ozone Park and provide a framework for more orderly and sustainable 

growth. 

RESOLUTION 

